PLAYER'S HANDBOOK'
I
I -',
)"
,
)
,.
\
'.~... .• •
CREDITS
0&0Lead Designers: Mike Mearls, Jeremy Crawford
P/aye,'s Handbaok Lead: jeremy Crawford
Rules Development: Rodney Thompson, Peter Lee
Writing: James Wyatt, Robert J. Schwalb, Bruce R. Cordell
Editing: Michele Carter, Chris Sims, Scol! Fitzgerald Gray,
Christopher Perkins
Producer: Greg Bilsland
Art Directors: Kate Irwin, Dan Gelon, Jon Schindehette,
Mari Kolkowsky, Melissa Rapier, Shauna Narciso
Graphic Designers: Bree Heiss, Emi Tanji, Barry Craig
Cover IlIustrator: Tyler Jacobson
Interior IIlustrators: Steve Argyle, Tom Babbey, Daren Bader,
Drew Baker, Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Christopher Bradley,
Noah Bradley, Sam Burley, Clint Cearley, Milivoj Ceran,
Sidharth Chaturvedi, Jedd Chevrier, jD, Allen Douglas,
Jesper Ejsing, Craig Elliott, Wayne England, Scott M. Fischer,
Randy Gallegos, Justin Gerard, Florian De Gesincourt, Lars
Grant-West, Jon Hodgson, Ralph Horsley, Lake Hurwitz,
Tyler Jacobson, Kekai Kotaki, Olly Lawson, Raphael Lübke,
Titus Lunter, Slawomir Maniak, Brynn Metheney, Aaran
Miller, Christopher Moeller, Mark Molnar, Scott Murphy,
William O'Connor, Hector Ortiz, David Palumbo, Alessandra
Pisa no, Claudio Pozas, Rob Rey, Wayne Reynolds, Aaron J.
Riley, Chris Seaman, Cynthia Sheppard, Craig J Spearing,
John Stanko, Matt Stawicki, Alex Stone, Thom Tenery, Cory
Trego-Erdner, Beth Tratt, Autumn Rain Turkel, jose Vega,
Tyler Walpole, Julian Kok Joon Wen, Richard Whitters, Eva
Widermann, Ben Wootten, Kieran YannerAdditional Contributors: Kim Mohan, Mal! Sernel!,
Chris Dupuis, Tom LaPille, Richard Baker, Miranda Horner,
Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, Steve Winter, Nina Hess,
Steve Townshend, Chris Youngs, Ben Petrisor, Tom Olsen
Project Management: Neil Shinkle, Kim Graham, John Hay
Production Services: Cynda Callaway, Brian Dumas,
Jefferson Dunlap, David Gershman, Anita Williams
Brand and Marketing: Nathan Stewart, Liz Schuh,
Chris Lindsay, Shelly Mazzanoble, Hilary Ross,
Laura Tommervik, Kim Lundstrom, Trevor Kidd
Based on the original game created by
E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson,
with Brian Blume, Rob Kuntz, james Ward, and Don Kaye
Drawing from further development by
j. Eric Holmes, Tom Moldvay, Frank Mentzer, Aaron Allston,
Harold Johnson, Roger E. Moore, David "Zeb" Cook, Ed
Greenwood, Tracy Hickman, Margaret Weis, Douglas Niles,
jeffGrubb, Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams,
Richard Baker, Peter Adkison, Keith Baker, Bill Slavicsek,
Andy Collins, and Rob Heinsoo
Playtesting provided by
over 175,000 fans of D&D. Thank you!
Additional consultation provided by
JeffGrubb, Kenneth Hite, Kevin Kulp, Robin Laws,
S. John Ross, the RPGPundit, Vincent Venturella, and Zak S.
ON lHE COVER
In this fiery scene illustrated by Tyler
Jacobson, the fire giant King Snurre,
suffering no fools to live, calls his hell
hounds to join him in confronting
unwelcome guests in his home.
Disc/a;mer: W;zards afIne Coost ;5nal responsible for the consequences of sp/itting up lhe parl'l, slidingoppendages inlhe maulh af Qleering green devi/face, occepting a dirlrler ;"1';101;0"
iram bugbears, storminglheftas!hallofQhillg;ontsteading, angering o dragon af eln)'",ariely, orsayingyes when lhe DMasks. "Areyou real/I'5ure?"
620A9217000001 EN
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6560-1
First Printing: August 2014
987654321CE
DUNGEONS & ORAGONS. 0&0, Wízards ofthe (oast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand. Player's Handbook. MonsterManual, Dungeon Moste,'sGtúde, ali other Wizards af
the Caast praduct names, and their respective logos aretrademarks arwizards ofthe Coast in lhe USA and other counlries. Alicharacters and their distinctive likenesses are property
orWizards ofthe Coast. This material isprotected under the copyright laws orthe United States of America. Any reproduction or unaulhorized useofthe material or artwork contained
herein isprohibited without the express written permission ofWizards of the Coast.
Printed in the USA. @2014 Wizards orthe Coast LLC, PO Box707, Renton, WA 98057.0707, USA. Manufactured byHasbro SA, Rue Emile.Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH.
Represented byHasbm ElImpe 4lhe SQlJare Stockley park Uxbrjdge Mjddlesex !lBU lEI LJK
CONTENTS
PREFACE 4PART2 171
Worlds ofAdventure 5
Using This Book 6
How to Play 6
Adventures 7
CHAPTER 1:STEP-By-STEP CHARACTERS ll
Beyond 1st Level 15
CHAPTER 2:RACES 17
Choosing a Race 17
Owarf 18
Elf 21
Halfiing 26
Human 29
Oragonborn 32
Gnome 35
Half.Elf 38
Half-Orc 40
Tiefling .42
CHAPTER 3:CLASSES 45
Barbaria n 46
Bard 51
Cleric 56
Oruid 64
Fighter 70
Monk 76
Paladin 82
Ranger 89
Rogue 94
Sorcerer 99
Warlock 105
Wizard 112
CHAPTER 4:PERSONALITY AND
BACKG ROUN D 121
Character Oetails 121
Inspiration 125
Backgrounds 125
CHAPTER 5:EQUIPMENT 143
Starting Equipment... 143
Wealth 143
Armor and Shields 144
Weapons 146
Adventuring Gear 148
Tools 154
Mounts and Vehicles 155
Trade Goods 157
Expenses 157
Trinkets 159
CHAPTER 6:CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS 163
MuIticlassi ng 163
Feats 165ApPENDIX A: CONDITIONS 290
The Material Planc 300
Beyond the Material 301199
317312
313304CHAPTER 10:SPELLCASTING 201
What Is a Spell? 201
Casting a Spell 202
CHAPTER 11:SPELLS : 207
Spe11Lists 207
Spel1 Oescriptions 211PART3CHAPTER 7:USING ABILITY SCORES 173
Ability Scores and Modifiers 173
Advantage and Oisadvantage 173
Proficiency Bonus 173
Ability Checks 174
Using Each Ability 175
Saving Throws 179
CHAPTER 8:ADVENTURING 181
Time 181
Movement 181
The Environment 183
Social Interaction 185
Resting 186
Between Adventures 186
CHAPTER 9:COMBAT 189
The Order ofCombat 189
Movement and Position 190
Actions in Combat 192
Making an Attack 193
Cover 196
Oamage and Healing 196
Mounted Combat... 198
Underwater Combat 198
CHARACTER SHEETApPENDIX D:
CREATURE STATISTICS
INDEXApPENDIX C:
THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE 300ApPENDIX B:
GODS OF THE MULTIVERSE 293
ApPENDIX E:
INSPIRATIONAL READING5
9INTRODUCTION
PART1
PREFACE
NCE UPON ATIME, LONG, LONG AGO, IN A
realm called the Midwestern United
States-specifically the states of Minne-
sota and Wisconsin-a group of friends
gathered together to forever alter the
history of gaming.
1twasn't their intent to do so. They were
tired of merely reading tales about worlds of magic,
monsters, and adventure. They wanted to play in those
worlds, rather than observe them. That they went on
to invent OUNGEONS &ORAGONS, and thereby ignite a
revolution in gaming that continues to this day, speaks
to two things.
First, it speaks to their ingenuity and genius in fig-
uring out that games were the perfect way to explore
worlds that could not otherwise exist. Almost every
modern game, whether played on a digital device or
a tabletop, owes some debt to 0&0.
Second, it is a testament to the inherent appeal of the
game they created. OUNGEONS &ORAGONS sparked a
thriving global phenomenon. [t is the first roleplaying
game, and it remains one of the best of its breed.
To play 0&0. and to play it well, you don't need to
read ali the rules, memorize every detail of the game,
or master the fine art of rolling funny looking dice.
None of those things have any bearing on what's best
about the game.
What you need are two things, the first being friends
with whom you can share the game. Playing games with
your friends is a lot of fun, but 0&0 does something
more than entertain.
Playing 0&0 is an exerci se in collaborative creation.
Vou and your friends create epic stories filled with ten-
sion and memorable drama. Vou create silly in-jokes
that make you laugh years later. The dice will be cruel
to you. but you will soldier on. Your collective creativ-
ity will build stories that you will tell again and again.
ranging from the utlerly absurd to the stuff of legend.
If you don't have friends interested in playing, don't
worry. There's a special alchemy that takes place
around a 0&0 table thal nothing else can match. Play
the game with someone enough, and the two of you
PREFACEare !ikely to end up friends. It's a cool side effect of the
game. Your next gaming group is as close as the nearest
game store, on!ine forum, or gaming convention.
The second thing you need is a lively imagination
or, more importantly, the willingness to use whatever
imagination you have. Vou don't need to be a master
storyteller or a brilliant artist. Voujust need to aspire to
create, to have the courage of someone who is willing to
build something and share it with others.
Luckily. just as 0&0 can strengthen your friendships,
it can help build in you the confidence to create and
share. 0&0 is a game that teaches you to look for the
clever solution, share the sudden idea that can overcome
a problem, and push yourself to imagine what could be,
rather than simply accept what is.
The first characters and adventures you create will
probably be a collection of clichés. That's true of every-
one, from the greatest Dungeon Masters in history on
down. Accept this rea!ity and move on to create the
second character or adventure, which will be betler,
and then the third, which will be betler still. Repeat that
over the course of time, and soon you'lI be able to create
anything, from a character's background story to an epic
world of fantasy adventure.
Once you have that skill, it's yours forever. Countless
writers, artists, and other creators can trace their begin-
nings to a few pages of 0&0 notes, a handful of dice,
and a kitchen table.
Above ali else, 0&0 is yours. The friendships you
make around the table will be unique to you. The adven-
tures you embark on. the characters you create, the
memories you make-these will be yours. 0&0 is your
personal corner of the universe, a place where you have
free reign to do as you wish.
Go forth now. Read the rules of the game and the
story of its worlds, but always remember that you are
the one who brings them to !ife. They are nothing
without the spark of !ife that you give them.
Mike Mearls
May 2014
INTRODUCTION
HEDUNGEONS &DRAGONSROLEPLAYING
game isabout storytelling inworlds of
swords and sorcery. !tshares elements
with childhood games ofmake-believe. Like
those games, 0&0isdriven byimagina-
tion. !t's about picturing the towering castle
beneath the stormy night sky and imagining
howa fantasy adventurer might react tothe challenges
that scene presents.
Oungeon Master (OM):Afterpassing through the
craggypeaks, the roadtakes asudden turn tothe east
and Castle Ravenlofttowers beforeyou.Crumbling
towers ofstone keepasilentwatch overthe approach.
Theylooklikeabandoned guardhouses. Beyondthese,
awidechasm gapes, disappearing intothe deep
fogbelow.Alowereddrawbridge spans the chasm,
leadingtoanarched entrance tothe castle courtyard.
Thechains ofthe drawbridge creak inthe wind,their
rust.eaten ironstraining withthe weight. Fromatop
the highstrong walls,stone gargoyles stare atyou
fromhollowsockets and grinhideously. Arotting
wooden portcullis, green withgrowth, hangs inthe
entrytunnel. Beyondthis, the main doors ofCastle
Ravenloftstand open, arichwarm lightspillinginto
the courtyard.
Phillip(playingGareth): Iwanttolookatthe
gargoyles. Ihaveafeelingthey're notjust statues.
Amy(playingRival:Thedrawbridgelooksprecarious?
Iwanttosee howsturdy itis.DoIthinkwecancross
it,orisitgoingtocollapse under ourweight?
Unlike agame ofmake-believe, 0&0gives structure
tothe stories, awayofdetermining the consequences
ofthe adventurers' action. Players roll dice toresolve
whether their attacks hitor miss or whether their adven-
turers can scale acliff,roll away from the strike ofa
magicallightning bolt, or pull offsome other dangerous
task. Anything ispossible, but the dice make some out-
comes more probable than others.
Oungeon Master (OM):OK,one atatime. Phillip,
you're lookingatthe gargoyles?
Phillip:Yeah. 15there anyhinttheymight be
creatures and notdecorations?
OM:Makean Intelligence check.
Phillip:Does myInvestigation skillapply?
OM:Sure!
Phillip(rollingad20):Ugh.Seven.
OM:Theylooklikedecorations toyou.AndAmy,
Rivaischecking out the drawbridge?Inthe DUNGEONS &DRAGONSgame, each player
creates an adventurer (also called acharacter) and
teams upwith other adventurers (played byfriends).
Working together, the group might explore adark dun-
geon, aruined city,ahaunted castle. alost temple deep
inajungle, or alava-filled cavero beneath amysterious
mountain. The adventurers can solve puzzles, talk with
other characters, battle fantastic monsters, and discover
fabulous magic items and other treasure.
One player, however, takes on the role ofthe Dungeon
Master (DM).the game's lead storyteller and referee.
The DMcreates adventures forthe characters, who nav-
igate its hazards and decide which paths toexplore. The
DMmight describe the entrance toCastle Ravenloft,
and the players decide what they want their adventurers
todo.WilIthey walk across the dangerously weathered
drawbridge? Tie themselves together with rope tomini-
mize the chance that someone will faliifthe drawbridge
gives way?Or cast aspell tocarry them over the chasm?
Then the DMdetermines the results ofthe adventur-
ers' actions and narrates what they experience. Because
the DMcan improvise toreact toanything the players
attempt,0&0isinfinitely f1exible,and each adventure
can beexciting and unexpected.
The game has no real end; when one story orquest
wraps up,another one can begin, creating an ongoing
story called acampaign. Many people who playthe
game keep their campaigns going formonths oryears.
meeting with their friends every week or so topick
up the story where they leftoff.The adventurers grow
inmight as the campaign continues. Each monster
defeated, each adventure completed, and each treasurc
recovered not onlyadds tothe continuing story, but also
earos the adventurers new capabilities. This increase
inpower isreflected byan adventurer's leveI.
There's nowinning and losing inthe DUNGEONS &
DRAGONS game-at least, notthe waythose terms are
usually understood. Together, the DMand lhe players
create an exciting story ofbold adventurers whoconfront
deadly perils. Sometimes an adventurer might come to
agrisly end, toro apart byferocious monsters ordone in
bya nefarious villain. Even so, the other adventurers can
search forpowerful magic torevive their fallen comrade,
orthe player might choose tocreate anew character to
carry on.The group might failtocomplete an adventure
successfully, but ifeveryone had agood time and created
amemorable story, theyaliwin.
WORLDS OF ADVENTURE
The many worlds ofthe DUNGEONS &DRAGONSgame
are places ofmagic and monsters, ofbrave warriors and
spectacular adventures. They begin with afoundation
ofmedieval fantasy and then add the creatures, places,
and magic that make these worlds unique.
The worlds ofthe DUNGEONS &DRAGONSgame exist
within avast cosmos called the multiverse, connected
instrange and mysterious ways toone another and to
other planes ofexistence. such as the Elemental Plane
ofFire and the lnfinite Depths ofthe Abyss. Within
lNTRODUl TION
6this multiverse are an endless variety of worlds. Many
of them have been published as official settings for the
D&D game. The legends of the Forgotten Realms, Drag-
onlance, Greyhawk, Dark Sun, Mystara, and Eberron
settings are woven together in the fabric of the multi-
verse. Alongside these worlds are hundreds of thousands
more, created by generations of D&D players for their
own games. And amid ali the richness of the multiverse,
you might create a world of your own.
Ali these worlds share characteristics, but each world
is set apart by its own history and cultures, distinctive
monsters and races, fantastic geography, anciem dun-
geons, and scheming villains. Some races have unusual
traits in different worlds. The halflings of the Dark Sun
setting, for example, are jungle-dwelling cannibals,
and the elves are desert nomads. Some worlds feature
races unknown in other settings, such as Eberron's war-
forged, soldiers created and imbued with life to fight in
the Last War. Some worlds are dominated by one great
story, like the War of the Lance that plays a central role
in the Dragonlance setting. But they're ali D&D worlds,
and you can use the rules in this book to create a char-
acter and play in any one of them.
Your DM might set the campaign on one of these
worlds or on one that he or she created. Because there
is so much diversity among the worlds of D&D, you
should check with your DM about any house rules that
will affect your play of the game. Ultimately, the Dun-
geon Master is the authority on the campaign and its
setting, even if the setting is a published world.
USING THIS BOOK
ThePlayer's Handbook is divided into three parts.
Part 1 is about creating a character, providing the
rules and guidance you need to make the character
you'lI play in the game. It includes information on the
various races, classes, backgrounds, equipment, and
other customization options that you can choose from.
Many of the rules in part 1 rely on material in parts 2
and 3. If you come across a game concept in part 1 that
you don't understand, consult the book's indexo
Part 2 details the rules of how to play the game,
beyond the basics described in this introduction. That
part covers the kinds of die rolls you make to determine
success or failure at the tasks your character attempts,
and describes the three broad categories of activity in
the game: exploration, interaction, and combat.
Part 3 is ali about magic. It covers the nature of magic
in the worlds of D&D, the rules for spellcasting, and the
huge variety of spells available to magic-using charac-
ters (and monsters) in the game.
HOWTO PLAY
The play of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game unfolds
according to this basic pattern.
1. The DM describes the environment. The DM
tells the players where their adventurers are and what's
around them, presenting the basic scope of options that
present themselves (how many doors lead out of a roam,
what's on a table, who's in the tavern, and so on).
INTRODUCTION2. The players describe what they want to do. Some-
times one player speaks for the whole party, saying,
"We'lI take the east door," for example. Other times,
different adventurers do different things: one adventurer
might search a treasure chest while a second examines
an esoteric symbol engraved on a wall and a third keeps
watch for monsters. The players don't need to take
turns, but the DM listens to every player and decides
how to resolve those actions.
Sometimes, resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer
wants to walk across a roam and open a door, the DM
might just say that the door opens and describe what
lies beyond. But the doar might be locked, the floor
might hide a deadly trap, or some other circumstance
might make it challenging for an adventurer to complete
a task. In those cases, the DM decides what happens,
often relying on the roll of a die to determine the results
of an action.
3. The DM narrates the results ofthe adventurers'
actions. Describing the results often leads to another
decision point, which brings the flow of the game right
back to step 1.
This pattern holds whether the adventurers are cau-
tiously exploring a ruin, talking to a devious prince, or
locked in mortal combat against a mighty dragon. In
certain situations, particularly combat, the action is
more structured and the players (and DM) do take turns
choosing and resolving actions. But most of the time,
play is fluid and flexible, adapting to the circumstances
of the adventure.
Often the action of an adventure takes place in the
imagination of the players and DM, relying on the DM's
verbal descriptions to set the scene. Some DMs like to
use music, art, ar recorded sound effects to help set the
mood, and many players and DMs alike adopt different
voices for the various adventurers, monsters, and other
characters they play in the game. Sometimes, a DM
might lay out a map and use tokens ar miniature figures
to represent each creature involved in a scene to help
the players keep track of where everyone is.
GAME DrCE
The game uses polyhedral dice with different numbers
of sides. Vou can find dice like these in game stores and
in many bookstores.
In these rules, the different dice are referred to by the
letter d followed by the number of sides: d4, d6, dS, dI O,
d12, and d20. For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die (the
typical cube that many games use).
Percentile dice, ar d100, work a little differently. Vou
generate a number between 1 and 100 by rolling two
different ten-sided dice numbered from Oto 9. One die
(designated before you roll) gives the tens digit, and
the other gives the ones digit. If you roll a 7 and a 1, for
example, the number rolled is 71. Two Os represent 100.
Some ten-sided dice are numbered in tens (00, 10, 20,
and so on), making it easier to distinguish the tens digit
from the ones digit. In this case, a roll of 70 and I is 71,
and 00 and Ois 100.
When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how
many dice to roll of a certain type, as well as what mod-
ifiers to add. For example, "3dS +5" means you roll
three eight-sided dice, add them together, and add 5
to the tota!.
The same d notation appears in the expressions "ld3"
and "ld2." To simulate the roll of Id3, roll a d6 and
divide the number rolled by 2 (round up). To simulate
the roll of Id2, roll any die and assign a I or 2 to the roll
depending on whether it was odd or even. (Alternatively,
if the number rolled is more than half the number of
sides on the die, it's a 2.)
THE D20
Does an adventurer's sword swing hurt a dragon or just
bounce off its iron-hard scales? Will the ogre believe an
outrageous bluff? Can a character swim across a raging
river? Can a character avoid the main blast of a fireball,
or does he or she take full damage from the blaze? In
cases where the outcome of an action is uncertain,
the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game relies on rolls of a
20-sided die, a d20, to determine success or failure.
Every character and monster in the game has capa-
bilities defined by six ability scores. The abilities are
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom,
and Charisma, and they typically range from 3 to 18
for most adventurers. (Monsters might have scores as
lowas I or as high as 30.) These ability scores, and the
ability modifiers derived from them, are the basis for
almost every d20 roll that a player makes on a charac-
ter's or monster's behalf.
Ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws are the
three main kinds of d20 rolls, forming the core of the
rules of the game. AIl three follow these simple steps.
1. Roll the die and add a modifier. Roll a d20 and
add the relevant modifier. This is typically the mod-
ifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and it
sometimes includes a proficiency bonus to reflect a char-
acter's particular skill. (See chapter I for details on each
ability and how to determine an ability's modifier.)
2. Apply circumstantial bonuses and penalties. A
class feature, a spell, a particular circumstance, ar some
other effect might give a bonus or penalty to the check.3. Compare the total to a target number. If the total
equals or exceeds the target number, the ability check,
attack roll, or saving throw is a success. Otherwise, it's
a failure. The DM is usually the one who determines
target numbers and tells players whether their ability
checks, attack rolls, and saving throws succeed or fai!'
The target number for an ability check or a saving
throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target
number for an attack roll is called an Armor Class (AC).
This sim pie rule governs the resolution of most tasks
in D&D play. Chapter 7 provides more detailed rules for
using the d20 in the game.
ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE
Sometimes an ability check, attack roll, or saving throw
is modified by special situations called advantage and
disadvantage. Advantage reflects the positive circum-
stances surrounding a d20 roll, while disadvantage
reflects the opposite. When you have either advantage or
disadvantage, you roll a second d20 when you make the
roll. Use the higher of the two rolls if you have advan-
tage, and use the lower roll if you have disadvantage.
For example, if you have disadvantage and roll a 17 and
a 5, you use the 5. If you instead have advantage and roll
those numbers, you use the 17.
More detailed rules for advantage and disadvantage
are presented in chapter 7.
SPECIFIC BEATS GENERAL
This book contains rules, especially in parts 2 and 3,
that govern how the game plays. That said, many racial
traits, class features, spells, magic items, monster abili-
ties, and other game elements break the general ruIes in
some way, creating an exception to how the rest of the
game works. Remember this: lf a specific ruIe contra-
dicts a general rule, the specific rule wins.
Exceptions to the rules are often minor. For instance,
many adventurers don't have proficiency with longbows,
but every wood elf does because of a racial trait. That
trait creates a minor exception in the game. Other
examples of rule-breaking are more conspicuous. For
instance, an adventurer can't normally pass through
walls, but some spells make that possible. Magic
accounts for most of the major exceptions to the rules.
ROUND DOWN
There's one more general rule you need to know at the
outset. Whenever you divide a number in the game,
round down if you end up with a fraction, even if the
fraction is one-half or greater.
ADVENTURES
The DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game consists of a group
of characters embarking on an adventure that the Dun-
geon Master presents to them. Each character brings
particular capabilities to the adventure in the form of
ability scores and skills, class features, racial traits,
equipment, and magic items. Every character is dif-
ferent, with various strengths and weaknesses, so the
best party of adventurers is one in which the characters
complement each other and cover the weaknesses of
INTRODUCTION
7
8their companions. The advenlurers musl coopera te to
successfully complete the adventure.
The adventure is the heart of the game, a story with
a beginning, a middle, and an end. An adventure might
be created by the Dungeon Master or purchased off the
shelf, tweaked and modified to suit the DM's needs and
desires. In either case, an adventure features a fantastic
selting, whether it's an underground dungeon, a crum-
bling castle, a stretch of wilderness, or a bustIing city.
It features a rieh cast of characters: the adventurers
created and played by the other players at the table,
as well as nonplayer characters (NPCs). Those char-
acters might be palrons, allies, enemies, hirelings, or
just background extras in an adventure. Often, one of
the NPCs is a villain whose agenda drives much of an
adventure's action.
Over the course of their adventures, the characters
are confronted bya variety of creatures, objects, and
situations that they must deal with in some way. Some-
times the adventurers and other creatures do their
best to kill or capture each other in combat. At other
times, the adventurers talk to another creature (or even
a magical object) with a goal in mind. And often, the
adventurers spend time trying to solve a puzzIe, bypass
an obstacle, find something hidden, or unraveI the cur-
rent situation. Meanwhile, the adventurers explore the
worId, making decisions about which way lo traveI and
what they'1I try to do next.
Adventures vary in length and complexity. A short
adventure might present only a few challenges, and
it might take no more than a single game session to
complete. A long adventure can involve hundreds of
combats, interactions, and other challenges, and take
dozens of sessions to play through, stretching over
weeks or months of real time. Usually, the end of an
adventure is marked by the adventurers heading back to
civilization to rest and enjoy the spoils of their labors.
Sut that's not the end of the story. Vou can think of
an adventure as a single episode of a TV series, made
up of multiple exciting scenes. A campaign is the whole
series-a string of adventures joined together, with a
consistent group of advenlurcrs following the narrative
from start to finish.
THE THREE PILLARS OF ADVENTURE
Adventurers can try to do anything their players can
imagine, bul it can be helpful to talk about their activ-
ities in three broad categories: exploration, social
interaction, and combat.
ExpIoration includes both lhe adventurers' movement
through the worId and their interaction with objects and
situations that require their altention. Exploration is the
give-and-take of the players describing what lhey wanl
their characters lOdo, and the Dungeon Master telling
the players whal happens as a result. On a large scale,
that might involve lhe characters spending a day cross-
ing a rolling plain or an hour making lheir way through
caverns underground. On the smallest scale, il could
mean one characler pulling a lever in a dungeon room lo
see what happens.
Social interaction features the advenlurers talking to
someone (or something) else. lt might mean demanding
INTRODUCTIONthat a captured scout reveal the secret entrance to the
goblin lair, getting information from a rescued prisoner,
pleading for mercy from an ore chieftain, or persuading
a talkative magic mirror to show a dislant location to
the advenlurers.
The rules in chapters 7 and 8 support exploration and
social interaclion, as do many c1ass features in chapler 3
and personality traits in chapter 4.
Combat, the focus of chapter 9, involves characters
and other creatures swinging weapons, casting spells,
maneuvering for position, and so on-all in an effort
to defeat their opponents, whether that means killing
every enemy, laking captives, or forcing a rout. Combat
is the most struclured element of a D&D session, with
creatures taking turns to make sure that everyone gets
a chance to act. Even in the contexl of a pitched battIe,
there's still plenty of opportunity for adventurers to
altempt wacky stunts like surfing down a lIight of stairs
on a shield, to examine the environment (perhaps by
pulling a mysterious lever), and lOinteract with other
creatures, including allies, enemies, and neutral parties.
THE WONDERS OF MAGIC
Few D&D adventures end without something magical
happening. Whether helpful or harmful, magie appears
frequently in the life of an advenlurer, and it is the focus
of chapters 10 and 11.
In the worlds of DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, practitioners
of magic are rare, set apart from the masses of people
by their extraordinary talent. Common foIk l11ightsee
evidcnce of magic on a regular basis, but it's usually
minor-a fantastic monster, a visibly answered prayer,
a wizard walking through the streets with an animated
shieId guardian as a bodyguard.
For adventurers, though, magic is key to their sur-
viva\. Without the healing magie of c1erics and paladins,
adventurers would quickly succumb to their wounds.
Wilhout the uplifting magieal support of bards and
c1erics, warriors might be overwhelmed by powerful
foes. Withoul the sheer magieal power and versatility
of wizards and druids, every threat would bc mag-
nified tenfold.
Magic is also a favored tool of villains. Many adven-
tures are driven by the machinations of spellcaslers
who are hellbent on using magic for some ill end. A cult
leader seeks to awaken a god who slumbers beneath
the sea, a hag kidnaps youths to magically drain them
of lheir vigor, a mad wizard labors to invest an army of
automatons with a facsimile of life, a dragon begins a
mystical ritual to rise up as a god of destruction-these
are just a few of the magical threats that adventurers
might face. With magic of their own, in the form of
spells and magic items, the adventurers might prevail!
PARTl
PART 1 CREi\TING H!\RA
9
CHAPTER1:STEP-By-STEP CHARACTERS
OURFIRSTSTEPINPLAYING ANADVENTURER INTHE
DUNGEONS &DRAGONSgame is toimagine
and create acharacter ofyour own. Your
character isacombination ofgame statistics,
roleplaying hooks, and your imagination. Vou
choose arace (such as human or halfling) and
aclass (such as fighter or wizard). Voualso
invent the personality, appearance, and backstory of
your character. Once completed, your character serves
as your representative inthe game, your avatar inthe
DUNGEONS &DRAGONSworld.
Before you diveinto step 1below, think about the
kind ofadventurer you want toplay.Voumight be a
courageous fighter, askulking rogue, afervent cleric, or
aflamboyant wizard. Oryou might be more interested
inan unconventional character, such as abrawny rogue
who likes hand-to-hand combat, orasharpshooter who
picksof[enemies from afar. Doyou like fantasy fiction
featuring dwarves or elves? Trybuilding acharacter of
one ofthose races. Doyouwant your character tobe the
toughest adventurer at the table? Consider aclass like
barbarian or paladin.lfyou don't know where else to
begin, take alookat the illustrations inthis book tosee
what catches your interest.
Once you have acharacter inmind, followthese steps
inorder, making decisions that reflect the character you
want. Yourconception ofyour character might evolve
with each choice you make. What's important isthat you
come tothe table with acharacter you're excited toplay.
Throughout this chapter, we use the term character
sheet tomean whatever you use totrack your character,
whether it's aformal character sheet (like the one at the
end ofthis book), some form ofdigital record, or apiece
ofnotebook paper. Anofficial 0&0 character sheet isa
fineplace tostart until you know what information you
need and howyou use itduring the game.
BUILDING BRUENOR
Each step ofcharacter creation includes an example of
that step, with aplayer named Bobbuilding his dwarf
character, Bruenor.
1.CHOOSE ARACE
Every character belongs toarace, one ofthe many
intelligent humanoid species inthe 0&0 world. The
most common player character races are dwarves, elves,
halflings, and humans. Some races also have subraces,
such as mountain dwarf orwood elf.Chapter 2provides
more information about these races, as well as the less
widespread races ofdragonborn, gnomes, half-elves,
half-orcs, and tieflings.
The race youchoose contributes toyour character's
identity inan important way,byestablishing ageneral
appearance and the natural talents gained from culture
and ancestry. Yourcharacter's race grants particular
racial traits, such as special senses, proficiency with
certain weapons ortoois,proficiency inone ormore
skills, or the ability touse minor spells. These traits
sometimes dovetail with the capabilities ofcertainclasses (see step 2).Forexample, the racial traits of
lightfoot halflings make them exceptional rogues, and
high elves tend tobe powerful wizards. Sometimes
playing against type can befun, too.Half-orc paladins
and mountain dwarf wizards, forexample, can be
unusual but memorable characters.
Yourrace also increases one or more ofyour ability
scores, which you determine instep 3.Note these
increases and remember toapply them later.
Record the traits granted byyour race onyour
character sheet. Besure tonote your starting
languages and your base speed as well.
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP I
Bob issitting down tocreate his character. He decides
that agruff mountain dwarf fitsthe character hewants
toplay.Henotes ali the racial traits ofdwarves on his
character sheet, including his speed of25 feet and the
languages he knows: Common and Dwarvish.
2.CHOOSE A CLASS
Every adventurer isamember ofaclass. Class broadly
describes acharacter's vocation, what special talents he
or she possesses, and the tactics he orshe ismost likely
toemploy when exploring adungeon, fighting monsters,
or engaging inatense negotiation. The character
classes are described inchapter 3.
Yourcharacter receives anumber ofbenefits from
your choice ofclass. Many ofthese benefits are class
features-capabilities (including spellcasting) that set
your character apart from members ofother classes.
Voualso gain anumber ofproficiencies: armor,
weapons, skills, saving throws, and sometimes tools.
Yourproficiencies define many ofthe things your
character can doparticularly well, from using certain
weapons totelling aconvincing lie.
Onyour character sheet, record ali the features that
your class givesyou at 1stleveI.
LEVEL
Typically,acharacter starts at 1stleveiand advances
inleveibyadventuring and gaining experience points
(XP).A1st-leveicharacter isinexperienced inthe
adventuring world, although he orshe might have been
asoldier or apirate and done dangerous things before.
Starting of[at 1stleveimarks your character's entry
into the adventuring life.Ifyou're already familiar
with the game, or ifyou arejoining an existing 0&0
campaign, your DMmight decide tohave you begin ata
higher levei,on the assumption that your character has
already survived afewharrowing adventures.
4 •
QUICK BUILD
Each e1ass description in chapter 3ineludes a section
offering suggestions to quickly build a character of that
e1ass, ineluding how to assign your highest ability scores,
a background suitable to lhe e1ass, and slarting spells.
~ r
PART IISTEP BY STEP CHARACTERS
11
Charisma
Measures:Confidenee, eloquenee, leadership
Importantfor: Bard, soreerer, warloek
Raciallncreases:Dexterity
Measures:Physieal agility, reflexes, balance, poise
Important for: Monk, ranger, rogue
Raciallncreases:
Constitution
Measures:HeaJth, stamina, vital force
Important for: Everyone
RaGÍallncreases:
Wisdom
Measures:Awareness, intuition, insight
Important for: Clerie, druid
Racial Jncreases:
Much ofwhat your character does in the game depends
on his ar her six abilities: Strength, Dexterity,
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma.
Each ability has ascore, which isa number you record
onyour character sheet.
The six abilities and their use in the game are
described inchapter 7.The Ability Score Summary3.DETERMINE ABILITY SCORESBUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 2
Bob imagines Bruenor charging into battIe with an axe,
one horo on his helmet broken ofr.He makes Bruenor a
fighter and notes the fighter's proficiencies and 1st-leveI
c1ass features on his character sheet.
Asa 1st-leveIfighter, Bruenor has 1Hit Die-a d10-
and starts with hit points equal to la+his Constitution
modifier. Bob notes this, and will record the final
number after he determines Bruenor's Constitution
score (see step 3).Bob also notes the proficiency bonus
fora 1st-leveicharacter, which is+2.PROFICIENCY BONUS
The table that appears inyour c1ass description shows
your proficiency bonus, which is+2 fora 1st-Ievel
character. Yourproficiency bonus applies to many ofthe
numbers you'lI be recording onyour character sheet:
Attack rolls using weapons you're proficient with
Attack rolls with spells you cast
Ability checks using skills you're proficient in
Ability checks using tools you're proficient with
Saving throws you're proficient in
Saving throw DCs forspells you cast (explained in
each spellcasting c1ass)
Yourc1ass determines your weapon proficiencies,
your saving throw proficiencies, and some ofyour skill
and tool proficiencies. (Skills are described inchapter 7,
tools inchapter 5.)Yourbackground gives you additional
skill and toaIproficiencies, and some races give
you more proficiencies. Be sure tonote ali ofthese
proficiencies, as well as your proficiency bonus, onyour
character sheet.
Your proficiency bonus can't be added toasingle die
roll ar other number more than once. Occasionally, your
proficiency bonus might be modified (doubled ar halved,
forexample) before you apply it.Ifa circumstance
suggests that your proficiency bonus applies more than
once tothe same roll ar that itshould be multiplied
more than once, you nevertheless add itonly once,
multiply itonly once, and halve itonly once.At 1st levei,your character has 1Hit Die, and the
die type isdetermined byyour c1ass. Voustart with hit
points equal tothe highest roll ofthat die, as indicated in
your c1ass description. (Youalso add your Constitution
modifier, which you'lI determine instep 3.)This isalso
your hit poiot maximum.
Record your character's hit points onyour character
sheet. AIso record the type ofHit Dieyour character
uses and the number ofHit Dice you have. After you
rest, you can spend Hit Dice toregain hit points (see
"Resting" inchapter 8).
HaJf-ore (+2)
Human (+1)
Half-ore (+1)
Human (+1)Forest gnome (+1)
Human (+1)
Human (+1)Tiefling (+1)
Human (+1)
Dragonborn (+1)
Human (+1)
Tiefling (+2)Elf (+2)
Halfling (+2)
Half.elf (+2)
Drow (+1)
Lightfoot halfling (+1)Dwarf (+2)
Stout halfling (+1)
Roek gnome (+1)
High elf (+1)
Gnome (+2)
Hill dwarf (+1)
Wood elf (+1)Record your leveionyour character sheet.lfyou're
starting at a higher levei,record the additional elements
your c1assgives you foryour leveis past 1sI.Also record
your experience points. A1st-leveicharacter has O
XP.Ahigher-Ievel character typically begins with the
minimum amount ofXP required toreach that levei
(see "Beyond 1st Levei" later inthis chapter).
Intelligenee
Measures:Mental aeuity, information reeall, analytieal skill
Important for: Wizard
Raciallncreases:HIT POINTS AND HIT DICE
Yourcharacter's hit points define how tough your
character isin combat and other dangerous situations.
Your hit points are determined byyour Hit Dice (short
for Hit Point Dice).
ABILITY SCORE SUMMARY
Strength
Measures:Natural athletieism, bodily power
Important for: Barbarian, fighter, paladin
Raciallncreases:
Mounta;n dwarf (+2)
Dragonborn (+2)
12PART 1ISTEP-BY-STEP CHARACTERS
table provides a quick reference for what qualities
are measured by each ability, what races increases
which abilities, and what classes consider each ability
particularly importan!.
Vou generate your character's six ability scores
randomly. Roll four 6-sided dice and record the total of
the highest three dice on a piece of scratch paper. Do
this five more times, so that you have six numbers. If
you want to save time or don't like the ide a of randomly
determining ability scores, you can use the following
scores instead: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10,8.
Now take your six numbers and write each number
beside one of your character's six abilities to assign
scores to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma. Afterward, make any changes
to your ability scores as a result of your race choice.
After assigning your ability scores, determine
your ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and
Modifiers table. To determine an ability modifier without
consulting the table, subtract 10 fram the ability score
and then divide the result by 2 (round down). Write the
modifier next to each of your scores.
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 3
Bob decides to use the standard set of scores (15, 14,
13, 12, 10,8) for Bruenor's abilities. Since he's a fighter,
he puts his highest score, 15, in Strength. His next-
highest, 14, goes in Constitution. Bruenor might be a
brash fighter, but Bob decides he wants the dwarf to
be older, wiser, and a good leader, so he puts decent
scores in Wisdom and Charisma. After applying his
racial benefits (increasing Bruenor's Constitution by
2 and his Strength by 2), Bruenor's ability scores and
modifiers look like this: Strength 17 (+3), Dexterity 10
(+0), Constitution 16 (+3), Intelligence 8 (-I), Wisdom 13
(+1),Charisma 12 (+1).
Bob fills in Bruenor's final hit points: 10 + his
Constitution modifier of +3, for a total of 13 hit points.
VARIANT: CUSTOMIZING ABILITY SCORES
At your Dungeon Master's option, you can use this
variant for determining your ability scores. The method
described here allows you to build a character with a set
of ability scores you choose individually.
Vou have 27 points to spend on your ability scores.
The cost of each score is shown on the Ability Score
Point Cost table. For example, a score of 14 costs 7
points. Using this method, 15 is the highest ability score
you can end up with, before applying racial increases.
Vou can't have a score lower than 8.
This method of determining ability scores enables
you to create a set of three high numbers and three low
ones (15, 15, 15, 8, 8, 8), a set of numbers that are above
ABILlTY SCORE POI NT COST
Score CosI Score CosI
8 O 12 4
9 1 13 5
10 2 14 7
11 3 15 9ABILITY SCORES ANO MOOIFIERS
Score Modifier Score Modifier
1 -5 16-17 +3
2-3 -4 18-19 +4
4-5 -3 20-21 +5
6-7 -2 22-23 +6
8-9 -1 24-25 +7
10-11 +0 26-27 +8
12-13 +1 28-29 +9
14-15 +2 30 +10
average and nearly equal (13,13,13,12,12,12), or any
set of numbers between those extremes.
4.DESCRIBE YOUR CHARACTER
Dnce you know the basic game aspects of your
character, it's time to f1esh him or her out as a person.
Your character needs a name. Spend a few minutes
thinking about what he or she looks like and how he or
she behaves in general terms.
Using the information in chapter 4, you can f1esh out
your character's physical appearance and personality
traits. Choose your character's alignment (the moral
compass that guides his or her decisions) and ideaIs.
Chapter 4 also helps you identify the things your
character holds most dear, called bonds, and the ftaws
that could one day undermine him or her.
Your character's background describes where he or
she carne from, his or her original occupation, and the
character's place in the D&D world. Your DM might
offer additional backgrounds beyond the ones included
13
'4.in chapter 4, and might be willing to work with you to
craft a background that's a more precise fit for your
character concept.
A background gives your character a background
feature (a general benefit) and proficiency in two skills,
and it might also give you additionallanguages or
proficiency with certain kinds of tools. Record this
information, along with the personality information
you develop, on your character sheet.
YOUR CHARACTER'S ABILITIES
Take your character's ability scores and race into
account as you flesh out his or her appearance
and personality. A very strong character with low
Intelligence might think and behave very differently
from a very smart character with low Strength.
For example, high Strength usually corresponds
with a burly or athletic body, while a character with
low Strength might be scrawny or plump.
A character with high Dexterity is probably lithe and
slim, while a character with low Dexterity might be
either gangly and awkward or heavy and thick-fingered.
A character with high Constitution usually looks
healthy, with bright eyes and abundant energy. A
character with low Constitution might be sickly or frai!.
A character with high Intelligence might be highly
inquisitive and studious, while a character with low
Intelligence might speak simply or easily forget details.
A character with high Wisdom has good judgment,
empathy, and a general awareness of what's going on.
A character with low Wisdom might be absent-minded,
foolhardy, or oblivious.
A character with high Charisma exudes confidence,
which is usually mixed with a graceful or intimidating
presence. A character with a low Charisma might come
across as abrasive, inarticulate, or tímido
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 4
Bob fills in some of Bruenor's basic details: his name,
his sex (male), his height and weight, and his alignment
(Iawful good). His high Strength and Constitution
suggest a healthy, athletic body, and his low Intelligence
suggests a degree of forgetfulness.
Bob decides that Bruenor comes from a noble line,
but his elan was expelled from its homeland when
Bruenor was very young. He grew up working as a smith
in the remote villages of Icewind Dale. But Bruenor
has a heroic destiny-to reelaim his homeland-so
Bob chooses the folk hero background for his dwarf.
He notes the proficiencies and special feature this
background gives him.
Bob has a pretty elear picture of Bruenor's personality
in mind, so he skips the personality traits suggested in
the folk hero background, noting instead that Bruenor is
a caring, sensitive dwarf who genuinely loves his friends
and allies, but he hides this soft heart behind a gruff,
snarling demeanor. He chooses the ideal of fairness
from the list in his background, noting that Bruenor
believes that no one is above the law.
Given his history, Bruenor's bond is obvious: he
aspires to someday reelaim Mithral Hall, his homeland,
from the shadow dragon that drove the dwarves out.
PART 1 ISTEP-BY-STEP CHARACTERSHis flaw is tied to his caring, sensitive nature-he has a
soft spot for orphans and wayward souls, leading him to
show mercy even when it might not be warranted.
5.CHOOSE EUIPMENT
Your elass and background determine your character's
starting equipment, ineluding weapons, armor, and
other adventuring gear. Record this equipment on your
character sheet. Ali such items are detailed in chapter 5.
Instead of taking the gear given to you by your elass
and background, you can purchase your starting
equipment. Vou have a number of gold pieces (gp)
to spend based on your elass, as shown in chapter 5.
Extensive lists of equipment, with prices, also appear in
that chapter. If you wish, you can also have one trinket
at no cost (see the trinket table at the end of chapter 5).
Your Strength score limits the amount of gear you can
carry. Try not to purchase equipment with a total weight
(in pounds) exceeding your Strength score times 15.
Chapter 7 has more information on carrying capacity.
ARMOR CLASS
Your Armor Class (AC)represents how well your
character avoids being wounded in battle. Things that
contribute to your AC inelude the armor you wear, the
shield you carry, and your Dexterity modifier. Not ali
characters wear armor or carry shields, however.
Without armor or a shield, your character's AC equals
10+his or her Dexterity modifier. If your character
wears armor, carries a shield, or both, calculate your
AC using the rules in chapter 5. Record your ACon
your character sheet.
Your character needs to be proficient with armor and
shields to wear and use them effectively,and your armor
and shield proficiencies are determined by your elass.
There are drawbacks to wearing armor or carrying a
shield if you lack the required proficiency, as explained
in chapter 5.
Some spells and elass features give you a different
way to calculate your AC. If you have multiple features
that give you different ways to calculate your AC,you
choose which one to use.
WEAPONS
For each weapon your character wields, calculate the
modifier you use when you attack with the weapon and
the damage you deal when you hit.
When you make an attack with a weapon, you roll
a d20 and add your proficiency bonus (but only if you
are proficient with the weapon) and the appropriate
ability modifier.
For attacks with melee weapons, use your Strength
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon that
has the finesse property, such as a rapier, can use your
Dexterity modifier instead.
For attacks with ranged weapons, use your Dexterity
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon thal
has the thrown property, such as a handaxe, can use
your Strength modifier inslead.
BUILDING BRUENOR, STEP 5
Bob writes down the starting equipment from the
fighter c1ass and the folkhero background. His starting
equipment includes chain mail and ashield, which
combine togive Bruenor an Armor Class of 18.
For Bruenor's weapons, Bobchooses abattleaxe
and two handaxes. His battleaxe isa melee weapon,
so Bruenor uses his Strength modifier for his attacks
and damage. His attack bonus ishis Strength modifier
(+3)plus his proficiency bonus (+2),foratotal of+5.
The battleaxe deals ld8 slashing damage, and Bruenor
adds his Strength modifier tothe damage when he
hits, fora total of ld8 +3slashing damage. When
throwing ahandaxe, Bruenor has the same attack bonus
(handaxes, as thrown weapons, use Strength for attacks
and damage), and the weapon deals ld6 +3slashing
damage when ithits.
6.COME TOGETHER
Most0&0characters don't work alone. Each character
plays arole within aparty, agroup ofadventurers
working together foracommon purpose. Teamwork
and cooperation greatly improve your party's chances
tosurvive the many perils in lhe worlds ofOUNGEONS
&ORAGONS. TaIk toyour fellow players and your OM
lodecide whether your characlers know one another,
how they mel, and what sorls ofquesls lhe group
might undertake.
BEYOND 1ST LEVEL
Asyour characler goes on adventures and overcomes
challenges, he or she gains experience, represenled by
experience poinls. Acharacter who reaches aspecified
experience poinl tolal advances incapabilily. This
advancemenl iscalled gaining aleveI.
When your characler gains aleveI,his or her c1ass
often granls addilional features, as delailed in the
c1ass description. Some ofthese fealures allow you
lo increase your abilily scores, eilher increasing lwo
scores by I each or increasing one score by2.Youcan't
increase an ability score above 20. In addilion, every
characler's proficiency bonus increases at certain leveIs.
Each time you gain aleveI,you gain I additional Hit
Oie. Rolllhal Hit Oie,add your Conslitulion modifier
tolhe roll, and add the total toyour hit point maximum.
Alternatively, you can use lhe fixedvalue shown inyour
c1assenlry, which isthe average resull oflhe die roll
(rounded up).
When your Conslilution modifier increases byI,your
hit poinl maximum increases byI foreach leve!you have
allained. For exampIe, when Bruenor reaches 81hleveI
as afighter, he increases his Conslilution score from 17
to 18,lhus increasing his Conslilulion modifier from +3
to+4. His hilpoint maximum lhen increases by8.
The Character Advancement lable summarizes the
XP you need toadvance in leveIs from leveI 1lhrough
leveI20, and lhe proficiency bonus foracharacler ofthal
leveI.Consull the informalion inyour character's c1ass
description tosee what olher improvements you gain
at each leveI.TIERS OF PLAY
The shading inthe Character Advancement (ableshows
lhe fourtiers ofplay.The tiers don't haveanyrules
associated wilh them; theyare ageneral descriplion ofhow
the playexperience changes as characters gain leveIs.
In lhe first lier (leveIs 1-4), characters are effeclively
apprentice adventurers. They are learning lhe features
that define lhem as members ofparlicular classes,
including lhe major choices that flavortheir c1ass
features as lhey advance (such as awizard's Arcane
Tradition or a fighter's Marlial Archetype). The threats
they face are re!ative!y minor, usually posing ananger lo
local farmsleads or villages.
In the second tier (leveIs 5-10), characlers come into
lheir own. Many spellcaslers gain access to 3rd-Ievel
spells aIlhe start ofthis tier, crossing anew threshold of
magical power with spells such as fireballandlightning
bolt.Atlhis lier, many weapon-using classes gain the
abilily lOmake mulliple attacks inone round. These
charac(ers have become imporlanl, facing dangers thal
lhrealen cities and kingdoms.
In the third lier (leveIs 11-16), characlers have
reached aleveIofpower that seIs lhem high ahove
the ordinary populace and makes them special even
among advenlurers. At 11th leveI,many spellcasters
gain access lo6th-leveI spells, some ofwhich create
effects previously impossible forplayer characters to
achieve. Olher characters gain fealures (hat allow (hem
lomake more attacks or do more impressive things with
those attacks. These mighty adventurers oflen confront
threals towhole regions and conlinents.
AIlhe fourth tier (leveIs 17-20), characters achieve
the pinnacle oflheir c1ass features, becoming heroic (or
villainous) archetypes inlheir own right. The fate ofthe
world or even lhe fundamental order oflhe multiverse
might hang in the balance during their adventures.
CHARACTER AOVANCEMENT
Experience Po;nts Levei Proficiency Bonus
O 1 +2
300 2 +2
900 3 +2
2,700 4 +2
6,500 5 +3
14,000 6 +3
23,000 7 +3
34.000 8 +3
48,000 9 +4
64,000 10 +4
85,000 11 +4
100,000 12 +4
120,000 13 +5
140,000 14 +5
165,000 15 +5
195,000 16 +5
225,000 17 +6
265,000 18 +6
305,000 19 +6
355,000 20 +6
PART1 STEP-BY-STEP {;HARA(TERS
'5
ICHAPTER 2:RACES
"
VISITTOONEOfTHEGREAT CITIESINTHE
worlds ofOUNGEONS &ORAGONS-
Walerdeep, the Free CilyofGreyhawk, or
even uncanny Sigil, the CityofOoors-
overwhelms lhe senses. Voices chatter in
counlless differenl languages. The smells
ofcooking indozens ofdifferenl cuisines
mingle with lhe odors ofcrowded slreels and poor
sanitalion. Buildings inmyriad architeclural styles
display lhe diverse origins oftheir inhabilants.
And lhe people lhemselves-people ofvarying size,
shape, and colorodressed inadazzling speclrum
ofslyles and hues-represenl many differenl races,
from diminulive halflings and stoul dwarves to
majeslically beauliful elves, mingling among avariety
ofhuman ethnicities.
Scattered among lhe members ofthese more common
races are the lrue exolics: ahulking dragonborn here,
pushing his way lhrough lhe crowd, and aslyliefling
there, lurking inlhe shadows with mischief inher eyes.
Agroup ofgnomes laughs as one oflhem activales a
clever wooden loylhal moves ofilsown accord. Half-
elves and half-orcs liveand work alongside humans,
without fullybelonging tolhe races ofeilher oflheir
parenls. And lhere, well oul oflhe sunlighl, isalone
drow-a fugilive from lhe sublerranean expanse of
the Underdark, trying tomake his way inaworld
thal fears his kind.
CHOOSING A RACE
Humans are lhe most common people inlhe worlds of
0&0, bul they liveand work alongside dwarves, elves,
halflings, and counlless olher fanlaslic species. Your
character belongs loone oflhese peoples.
Nolevery inlelligent race oflhe mulliverse is
appropriale foraplayer-conlrolled advenlurer. Owarves,
elves, halflings, and humans are the most common
races toproduce the sorl ofadvenlurers who make up
lypical parlies. Oragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, half-
orcs, and lieflings are less common as adventurers.
Orow,asubrace ofelves, are also uncommon.
Yourchoice ofrace affects many differenl aspecls of
your character. /testablishes fundamenlal qualities thal
exisl IhroughoUI your characler's adventuring career.
When making lhis decision, keep inmind lhe kind of
character you wanl lOplay.For example, ahalfling could
be agood choice forasneaky rogue, adwarf makes a
lough warrior, and anelfcan beamaSler ofarcane magic,
Yourcharacler race nol onlyaffecIs your abilily scores
and lrails bul also provides lhe cues forbuilding your
characler's story. Each race's descriplion inlhis chapler
includes information tohelpyou roleplay acharacler of
lhal race, including personality, physical appearance,
features ofsociely, and racial alignmenl lendencies.
These delails are suggeslions tohelp you think aboul
your characler; adventurers can deviate widely from lhe
norm forlheir race. /t's worthwhile toconsider whyyour
character isdifferenl, as ahelpful way tothink aboul
your characler's background and personalily.RACIAL TRAITS
The descriplion ofeach race includes racial traits lhal
are common tomembers oflhal race. The following
entries appear among lhe lrails ofmost races.
ABILITY SCORE INCREASE
Every race increases one or more ofacharacler's
abilily scores.
AGE
The age entry noles the age when amember oflhe race
isconsidered an adult, as well as the race's expected
lifespan. This informalion can helpyou decide how
oldyour characler isat lhe start oflhe game. Vou
can choose any age foryour characler, which could
provide an explanation forsome ofyour ability scores.
For example, ifyou playayoung orvery oldcharacter,
your age could explain aparticularly lowStrength or
Conslitulion score, while advanced age could accounl
forahigh Inlelligence orWisdom.
ALIGNMENT
Mosl races have tendencies loward cerlain alignments,
described inthis entry. These are nol binding forplayer
characlers, bul considering whyyour dwarf ischaolic.
forexample, indefiance oflawful dwarf society can help
you better define your characler,
SIZE
Characlers ofmosl races are Medium, asize calegory
including creatures lhal are roughly 4lo8feet la11.
Members ofafewraces are Small (belween 2and 4 feel
la11),which means lhal cerlain rules oflhe game affecl
lhem differenlly. The mosl importanl oflhese rules
islhal Small characters have lrouble wielding heavy
weapons, as explained inchapler 6.
SPEED
Yourspeed delermines how faryou can move when
lraveling (chapler 8)and fighling (chapler 9).
LANGUAGES
Byvirtue ofyour race, your character can speak, read,
and wrlte cerlain languages. Chapler 4 lisls the mosl
common languages oflhe 0&0 multiverse.
SUBRACES
Some races have subraces. Members ofasubrace
have lhe lrails ofthe parenl race inaddition lolhe
lrails specified forlheir subrace. Relationships among
subraces vary significantly from race lorace and
world toworld. In the Oragonlance campaign setting,
forexample, mountain dwarves and hill dwarves live
logelher as differenl clans oflhe same people, bul in
the Forgolten Realms, lhey livefaraparl inseparale
kingdoms and call lhemselves shield dwarves and
golddwarves, respeclively.
PARTIIRACES17
18DWARF
"YER LATE, ELF!" CAME THE ROUGH EDGE OF A FAMILIAR
voice. Bruenor Battlehammer walked up the back of his
deadfoe, disregardingthefact that the heavy monster lay
on top ofhis elvenfriend. In spite ofthe added discamfort,
the dwarf's long, pointed, often-broken nose and gray-
streaked though still-fiery red beard came as a welcame
sight to Drizzt. "Knew I'dfindye introuble if I came out
an' lookedforyel"
-R. A. Salvatore, The Crystal Shard
Kingdoms rich in ancienI grandeur, halls carved into the
rools of mountains, lhe echoing of picks and hammers
in deep mines and blazing forges, a commitmenl 10
clan and lradilion, and a burning halred of goblins and
ores-lhese eommon lhreads unile ali dwarves.
PART IIRACESSHORT AND STOUT
Bold and hardy, dwarves are known as
skilled warriors, miners, and workers
ofstone and melaI. Though lhey sland
well under 5 feel tall, dwarves are so
broad and compael lhal lheycan weigh
as much as a human slanding nearly lwo
feet laller. Their courage and endurance
are also easily a maleh for any of
lhe larger folk.
Owarven skin ranges from deep brown to a paler
hue linged wilh red, bul lhe most eommon shades are
lighl brown or deep lan, like cerlain lones of earlh.
Their hair, worn long bul in simple slyles, is usually
black, gray, or brown, lhough paler dwarves oflen have
red hair. Male dwarves value lheir beards highly and
groom lhem carefully.
LONG MEMORY, LONG GRUDGES
Owarves can liveto be more than 400 years old, so lhe
oldesl living dwarves often remember a very differenl
world. For example, some of lhe oldesl dwarves living
in Ciladel Felbarr (in lhe world of lhe Forgotten Realms)
can recall lhe day, more lhan three cenluries ago, when
ores conquered lhe forlress and drove lhem into an exile
lhal lasled over 250 years. This longevity granls lhem a
perspeclive on lhe world lhal shorter-lived races such as
humans and halflings lack.
Owarves are solid and enduring like the mounlains
they love,wealhering lhe passage of cenluries wilh stoic
endurance and little change. They respecl lhe lradilions
of lheir clans, lracing their anceslry back lo lhe
founding of lheir mosl ancienl slrongholds in lhe youth
of lhe world, and don'l abandon those lradilions lighlly.
ParI of lhose traditions is devolion lo lhe gods of lhe
dwarves, who uphold lhe dwarven ideais of induslrious
labor, skill in baltle, and devolion lo lhe forge.
Individual dwarves are determined and loyal, lrue lo
lheir word and decisive in action, somelimes lo lhe poinl
of ~tubbornness. Many dwarves have a strong sense
ofjustice, and they are slow to forget wrongs they have
suffered. Awrong dane to one dwarf is a wrong dane to
the dwarf's entire dan, so what begins as one dwarf's
hunt for vengeance can become a full-blown dan feudo
CLANS AND KINGDOMS
Dwarven kingdoms stretch deep beneath the mountains
where the dwarves mine gems and precious metais
and forge items ofwonder. They love the beauty and
artistry of precious metais and finejewelry, and in some
dwarves this lave festers into avarice. Whatever wealth
they can't find in their mountains, they gain through
trade. They dislike boats, so enterprising humans and
halflings frequently handle trade in dwarven goods
along water routes. Trustworthy members of other races
are welcome in dwarf settlements, though some areas
are offlimits even to them.
The chief unit of dwarven society is the dan, and
dwarves highly value social standing. Even dwarves
who live far from their own kingdoms cherish their dan
identities and affiliations, recognize related dwarves,
and invoke their ancestors' names in oaths and curses.
To be danless is the worst fate that can befall a dwarf.
Dwarves in other lands are typically artisans,
especially weaponsmiths, armorers, and jewelers. Some
become mercenaries ar bodyguards, highly sought after
for their courage and loyalty.
GODS, GOLD, AND CLAN
Dwarves who take up the adventuring life might be
motivated bya desire for treasure-for its own sake, for
a specilic purpose, ar even out of an altruistic desire to
help others. Other dwarves are driven by the command
ar inspiration of a deity, a direct calling or simply a
desire to bring glory to one of the dwarf gods. Clan and
ancestry are also important motivators. Adwarf might
seek to restore a dan's lost honor, avenge an ancienl
wrong the dan suffered, ar earn a new place within the
dan after having been exiled. ar a dwarf might search
for the axe wielded bya mighty ancestor, lost on the lield
of battle centuries ago.SLOW TO TRUST
Dwarves gel along passably well wilh mosl olher races. "The
difference belween an acquainlance and a friend is aboul a
hundred years," is a dwarf saying lhal mighl be hyperbole,
bul cerlainly poinls lo how diflicull ilcan be for a member of
a shorl-lived race Iikehumans lo eam a dwarf's lrusl.
Elves."I!'s nol wise lo depend on lhe elves. No lelling whal
an elfwilldo nexl; when lhe hammer meels lhe orc's head,
lhey're as apllo slart singing as lo pull oul a sword. They're
fiighly and frivolous. Twolhings lo be said for lhem, lhough:
They don'l have many smilhs, bullhe ones lhey have do very
fine work. And when ores ar goblins come slreaming down
oul oflhe mounlains, an elf's good lo have aI your back. Nol
as good as a dwarf, maybe, bul no doubllhey hale lhe ores
as much as we do."
Half/ings. "Sure, lhey're pleasanl folk. Sul show me a
halfiing hera. An empire, a lriumphanl army. Even a lreasure
for lhe ages made by halfiing hands. NOlhing. How can you
lake lhem seriously?"
Humans. "Youlake lhe lime lo gel lo know a human, and
bylhen lhe human's on her dealhbed. Ifyou're lucky,she's
gol kin-a daughler ar granddaughler, maybe-who's gol
hands and hearl as good as hers. Tha!'s when you can make
a human friend. And walch lhem gol They sellheir hearts on
somelhing, lhey'll gel il,whelher i!'s a dragon's hoard ar an
empire's lhrone. Youhave lo admire lhal kind of dedicalion,
even ifil gels lhem in lrouble more oflen lhan nol."
~ r
20DWARF NAMES
Adwarf's name isgranted byac1anelder, inaccordance
with tradition, Every proper dwarven name has been
used and reused down through the generations, A
dwarf's name belongs tothe c1an,not tothe individual.
Adwarf who misuses orbrings shame toac1anname
isstripped ofthe nameand forbidden bylaw touse any
dwarven name initsplace,
Male Names: Adrik, Alberich, Baern, Barendd, Brottor,
Bruenor, Oain, Oarrak, Oelg, Eberk, Einkil, Fargrim,
Flint, Gardain, Harbek, Kildrak, Morgran, Orsik,
Oskar, Rangrim, Rurik, Taklinn, Thoradin, Thorin,
Tordek, Traubon, Travok, Ulfgar, Veit,Vondal
Female Names: Amber, Artin, Audhild, Bardryn,
Oagnal, Oiesa, Eldeth, Falkrunn, Finellen, Gunnloda,
Gurdis, Helja, Hlin, Kathra, Kristryd, lide, Liftrasa,
Mardred, Riswynn, Sannl, Torbera, Torgga, Vistra
Clan Names: Balderk, Battlehammer, Brawnanvil,
Oankil, Fireforge, Frostbeard, Gorunn, Holderhek,
Ironfist, Loderr, Lutgehr, Rumnaheim, Strakeln,
Torunn, Ungart
DWARF TRAITS
Yourdwarf character has an assortment ofinborn
abilities, part and parcel ofdwarven nature.
Ability Seore Inerease. YourConstitution seore
increases by2.
Age.Owarves mature at the same rate as humans, but
they're considered young until they reach the age of 50,
On average, they liveabout 350 years.
Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly
inthe benefits ofawell-ordered society. They tend
toward good as well, with astrong sense offair playand
abelief that everyone deserves toshare inthe benefits of
ajust order.
Size.Owarves stand between 4and 5feet tall and
average about 150 pounds. Yoursize isMedium.
Speed.Yourbase walking speed is25 feel. Your
speed is notreduced bywearing heavy armor.
Darkvision. Accustomed tolifeunderground, you
have superior vision indark and dim conditions. Vou
can see indim light within 60 feet ofyou as ifitwere
bright light, and indarkness as ifitwere dim lighl.Vou
can't discern color indarkness, onlyshades ofgray.
Dwarven Resilienee. Vouhave advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance against
poison damage (explained inchapter 9).
Dwarven Combat Training. Vouhave proficiency
with the battleaxe, handaxe, throwing hammer,
and warhammer.
PART IIRACESTooJProficieney. Vougain proficiency with the
artisan's tools ofyour choice: smith's tooIs,brewer's
supplies, or mason's tools.
Stoneeunning. Whenever you make an Intelligence
(History) check related tothe origin ofstonework, you
are considered proficient inthe History skill and add
double your proficiency bonus tothe check, instead of
your normal proficiency bonus.
Languages. Voucan speak, read, and write Common
and Owarvish. Owarvish isfullofhard consonants and
guttural sounds, and those characteristics spill over into
whatever other language adwarf might speak.
Subraee.Twomain subraces ofdwarves populate the
worlds of0&0: hill dwarves and mountain dwarves.
Choose one ofthese subraces.
HILL DWARF
Asahill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition,
and remarkable resilience. The golddwarves ofFaenln
intheir mighty southern kingdom are hill dwarves, as
are the exiled Neidar and the debased Klar ofKrynn in
the Oragonlance setting.
Ability Seore Inerease. YourWisdom score
increases by 1.
Dwarven Toughness. Yourhit point maximum
increases by 1,and itincreases by 1every time you
gain aleveI.
MOUNTAIN DWARF
Asamountain dwarf, you're strong and hardy,
accustomed toadifficult lifeinrugged terrain. You're
probably on the tall side (foradwarf), and tend toward
lighter coloration, The shield dwarves ofnorthern
Faerun, as wellas the ruling Hylar c1anand the noble
Oaewar c1anofOragonlance, are mountain dwarves.
Ability Seore Inerease. YourStrength score
increases by2.
Dwarven Armor Training. Vouhave proficiency with
light and medium armor.
••
DUERGAR
Incities deep in the Underdark live the duergar, ar gray
dwarves. These vicious, stealthy slave traders raid lhe surface
world for caplives, lhen sell lheir prey lo lhe olher races of
lhe Underdark. They have innale magical abililies lo become
invisible and lo lemporarily grow lo gianl size.
ELF
"I HAVE NEVER IMAGINED SUCH BEAUTY EXISTED,"
Goldmoon saidsoft!)'.Theday'smarchhadbeendifficult.
butthereward attheend wasbeyond theirdreams.
Thecompanions stood onahighcliffoverthefabled
cityofQualinost.
Fourslenderspiresrasefrom thecity'scornerslikeglisten-
ingspindles, theirbrilliantwhitestone marbled withshining
silver.Gracefularches.swoopingfrom spire tospire,soared
through theair.Crafted byancient dwarven metalsmiths.
they werestrongenough toholdtheweightofanarmy,yet
theyappeared sodelicate that abirdlighting onthem might
overthraw thebalance, These glisteningarcheswerethe
city'son!)'boundaries; therewas nowallaround Qualinost.
Theelvencityopened itsarms loving!)' tothewilderness.
-Margaret Weis &Tracy Hickman,
DragonsofAutumn Twilight
Elves are a magical people of otherworldly grace, living
in the world but not entirely part of it. They live in
places of ethereal beauty, in the midst of ancient forests
ar in silvery spires glittering with faerie light, where
soft music drifts through the air and gentle fragrances
waft on the breeze. Elves lave nature and magic, art
and artistry, music and poetry, and the good things
of the world.
SLENDER AND GRACEFUL
With their unearthly grace and fine features, elves
appear hauntingly beautiful to humans and members
of many other races. They are slightly shorter than
humans on average, ranging from well under 5 feet
tall tojust over 6 feet. They are more slender than
humans, weighing only 100 to 145 pounds. Males andfemales are about the same height, and males are only
marginaIly heavier than females.
Elves' coloration encompasses the normal human
range and also includes skin in shades of copper,
bronze, and almost bluish-white, hair of green ar blue,
and eyes like pools of liquid gold ar silver. Elves have no
facial and little body hair. They favor elegant c10thing in
bright colors, and they enjoy simple yet lovelyjewelry,
ATIMELESS PERSPECTIVE
Elves can live weIl over 700years, giving them a broad
perspective on events that might trouble the shorter-
lived races more deeply, They are more often amused
than excited, and more likely to be curious than
greedy. They tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty
happenstance. When p"rs"ing a goal, however, whether
PART tRACES
21
22adventuring on a mission or learning a new skill or art,
elves can be focused and relentless. They are slow to
make friends and enemies, and even slower to forget
them. They reply to petty insults with disdain and to
serious insults with vengeance.
Like the branches of a young tree, elves are f1exible
in the face of danger. They trust in diplomacy and
compromise to resolve differences before they escalate
to violence. They have been known to retreat from
intrusions into their woodland homes, confident
that they can simply wait the invaders oul. But when
the need arises, elves reveal a stern martial side,
demonstrating skill wilh sword, bow, and strategy.
HIDDEN WOODLAND REALMS
Most elves dwell in small forest villages hidden among
the trees. Elves hunt game, gather food, and grow
vegetables, and their skill and magie allow them to
support themselves without the need for clearing and
plowing land. They are talented artisans, crafting finely
worked clothes and art objects. Their contact with
outsiders is usually limited, though a few elves make a
good living by trading crafted items for metais (which
thcy have no interest in mining).
Elves encountered outside their own lands are
commonly traveling minstrels, artists, or sages. Human
nobles compete for lhe services of elf instructors to
teach swordplay or magie to their children.
EXPLORATION AND ADVENTURE
EI\'es lake up advenluring out of wanderlust. Since
they are so long-lived, they can enjoy centuries of
exploration and discovery. They dislike lhe pace of
human society, whieh is regimenled from day lo day but
constantly changing over deeades, so lhey find careers
that let them travei freely and set their own pace. Elves
also enjoy exercising their martial prowess or gaining
greatcr magical power, and adventuring allo\Vs them
PART I IRACESto do so. Some mlght join with rebels fighting against
oppression, and others might become champions of
moral causes.
ELF NAMES
Elves are considered children until they declare
themselves adults, some time after the hundredth
birthday, and before this period they are called
by child names.
On declaring adulthood, an elf selects an adult name,
although those who knew him or her as a youngster
mlght continue to use the child name. Each elf's adult
name is a unique creation, though It might reflect
the names of respected individuaIs or other family
members. Little distinction exists between male
names and female names; the groupings here reflect
only general tendencies. In addition, every elf bears a
family name, typieally a comblnation of other Elvish
words. Some elves traveling among humans translate
their family names into Common, but others retain the
Elvish version.
ChildNames: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil,
Lael, Mella, Naill, Naeris, Phann, Rael, Rinn, Sai,
Syllin, Thia, Vali
MaleAdultNames: Adran, Aelar, Aramil, Arannis,
Aust, Beiro, Berrian, Carrie, Enialis, Erdan, Erevan,
Galinndan, Hadarai, Heian, Himo. Immeral, Ivellios,
Laucian, Mindartis, Paelias, Peren, Quarion, Riardon,
Rolen, Soveliss, Thamior, Tharivol, Theren, Varis
HAUGHTY BUT GRACIOUS
Although they can be haughty, elves are generally gracious
even to those who fali short of their high expectations-
which is most non.elves. 5till, they can find good in just
about anyone.
Dwarves."Dwarves are dull, c1umsy oafs. But what they
lack in humor, sophistication, and manners, they make up in
valor. And Imust admit, their best smiths produce art that
approaches elven quality."
Haljlings."Halflings are people of simple pleasures, and
that is not a quality to scorn. lhey're good folk, they care
for each other and tend their gardens, and they have proven
themselves tougher than they seem when the need arises."
Humans."Alithat haste, their ambition and drive to
accomplish something before their brieflives pass away-
human endeavors seem 50futile sometimes. But then
you look at what they have accomplished, and you have to
appreciate their achievements. Ifonly they could slow down
and learn some refinement."~ ,
Female Adult Names: Adrie, Althaea, Anastrianna,
Andraste, Antinua, Bethrynna, Birel, Caelynn,
Orusilia, Enna, Felosial, lelenia,jelenneth, Keyleth,
Leshanna, Lia, Meriele, Mialee, Naivara, Quelenna,
Quillathe, Sariel, Shanairra, Shava, Silaqui,
Theirastra, Thia, Vadania, Valanthe, Xanaphia
Fami1y Names (Common Translations): Amakiir
(Gemflower), Amastacia (Starflower), Galanodel
(Moonwhisper), Holimion (Oiamonddew), IIphelkiir
(Gemblossom), Liadon (Silverfrond), Meliamne
(Oakenheel), Nailo (Nightbreeze), Siannodel
(Moonbrook), Xiloscient (Goldpetal)
ELF TRAITS
Yourelfcharacter has avariety ofnatural abilities, the
result ofthousands ofyears ofelven refinemenl.
Ability Score Increase. YourOexterity score
increases by2.
Age.AIthough elves reach physical maturity at about
the same age as humans, the elven understanding of
adulthood goes beyood physical growth toeocompass
worldly experience. Aoelftypically c1aims adulthood
aod ao adult name arouod the age of 100 aod cao live
tobe 750 years old.
Alignment. Elves lovefreedom, variety, aod self-
expressioo, so they lean stroogly toward the geotler
aspects ofchaos. They value aod protect others'
freedom as well as their owo, aod they are more
often good thao 001.The drow are ao exceptioo; their
exile ioto the Uoderdark has made them vicious aod
daogerous. Orow are more often evilthao oot.
Size.Elves raoge from under 5toover 6feet tall aod
have sleoder builds. Yoursize isMedium.
Speed.Yourbase walkiog speed is 30feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed totwilit forests and the oight
sky,you have superior vision iodark aod dim cooditioos.
Voucao see iodim light withio 60 feet ofyou as ifit
were bright light, aod iodarkness as ifitwere dim lighl.
Voucao'l discero color iodarkoess, ooIyshades ofgray. ,
KeenSenses. Vouhave proficieocy iothe
Perceptioo skill.
FeyAncestry. Vouhave advaolage 00saviog throws
agaiost beiog charmed, and magic cao't putyou tosleep.'.;,.
Trance.Elves doo't need tosleep. Ioslead, lhey
meditate deeply, remainiog semicooscious, for4
hours aday.(The Commoo word forsuch meditatioo
is"traoce.") While meditatiog, you cao dream after a
fashioo; such dreams are actually meotal exercises that
have become reflexive through years ofpractice. Afler
resliog iolhis way,you gaio lhe same beoefit that a
humao does from 8hours ofsleep.
Languages. Voucao speak, read, and write Common
aod Elvish. Elvish isfluid,wilh subtle iotonatioos aod
iotricate grammar. Elveo literature is rich aod varied,
aod their soogs aod poems are famous among other
races. Maoy bards learo lheir laoguage so lhey cao add
Elvish ballads lolheir repertoires.
Subrace.Aocieot divides amoog the elveo people
resulled inlhree maio subraces: high elves, wood elves,
aod dark elves, who are commooly called drow. Choose
ooe oflhese subraces. lo some worlds, these subraces
are divided slill further (such as lhe suo e1vesand mooo
elves ofthe Forgotteo Realms), so ifyou wish, you can
choose aoarrower subrace.
HIGH ELF
Asahigh elf,you have akeeo mind and amastery of
atleast lhe basics ofmagic. In many ofthe worlds
of0&0, lhere are two kinds ofhigh elves. Ooe lype
(which includes lhe gray e1vesaod valley elves of
Greyhawk, the Silvaoesti ofOragoolaoce, and lhe
sun elves oflhe Forgotteo Realms) is haughty and
reclusive, believing lhemselves tobe superior lo
ooo-elves and even other elves. The other type
(iocludiog the high elves ofGreyhawk. the
Qualinesli ofOragonlance, and the moon elves
ofthe Forgotteo Realms) are more common
and more friendly, and oflen encouolered
among humans and olherraces.
The sun elves ofFaeruo (also called gold
elves or sunrise elves) have bronze skin and
hair ofcopper, black, or golden blood. Thcir
eyes are golden, silver, or black. Moon elves (also
called silver elves orgray elves) are much paler,
with alabasler skio somelimes tioged wilh blue.
They oflen have hair ofsilver-while, black, or blue,
but various shades ofblond, brown, and red are
not uncommon. Their eyes are blue or green and
flecked with gold.
Ability Score Increase. Yourlotelligeoce score
iocreases by I.
ElfWeapon Training. Vouhave proficiency with
lhe longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow.
P'\RTl (t-S
Cantrip.Vouknow one Canlrip ofyour choice from
lhe wizard spelllisl. Inlelligence isyour spellcasling
abilily foril. ',."
Extra Language. Voucan speak, read, and wrile one
exlra language ofyour choice.
WOOD ELF
Asawood elf,you have keen senses and inluilion, and
your fleel feel carry you quickly and sleallhily lhrough
your nalive foresls. This calegory includes lhe wild
elves (grugach) ofGreyhawk and lhe Kagonesli of
Dragonlance, as well as lhe races called wood elves in
Greyhawk and lhe Forgolten Realms. [n Faenln, wood
elves (also called wild elves. green elves, or foresl elves)
are reclusive and dislrusling ofnon-elves.
Wood elves' skin lends lobecopperish inhue,
somelimes wilh lraces ofgreen. Their hair lends loward
browns and blacks, bul ilisoccasionally blond or
copper-colored. Their eyes are green, brown, or hazel.
Ability Score Increase. YourWisdom score
increases by 1.
ElfWeapon Training. Vouhave proficiency wilh lhe
longsword, shorlsword, shorlbow, and longbow.
F1eetofFoot. Yourbase walking speed
increases lo35 feel.
Mask ofthe Wild. Voucan altempllo hide even when
you are only lighlly obscured byfoliage, heavy rain,
falling snow, misl, and olher nalural phenomena.DARK ELF (DROW)
Descended from an earlier subrace ofdark-skinned
elves; lhedrow were banished from lhe surface world
forfollowing lhe goddess Lollh down lhe palh lo
eviland corruplion. Nowlhey have builllheir own
civilizalion inlhe deplhs oflhe Underdark, palterned
afler lhe WayofLollh. Also called dark elves. lhe drow
have black skin lhal resemb[es polished obsidian and
slark while ar pale yellow hair. They commonly have
very pale eyes (sopale as lObemislaken forwhile) in
shades oflilac, silver, pink, red, and blue. They lend lo
be smaller and lhinner lhan mosl elves.
Drow advenlurers are rare, and lhe race does nolexisl
inali worlds. Check wilh your Dungeon Masler losee
ifyou can playadrow characler.
Ability Score Increase. YourCharisma score
increases by 1.
Superior Darkvision. Yourdarkvision has a
radius of 120 feel.
SunJightSensitivity. Vouhave disadvanlage on altack
rolls and on Wisdom (Perceplion) checks lhal relyon
sighl when you, lhe largel ofyour altack, ar whalever
you are trying toperceive isindirecl sunlighl.
Drow Magic. Vouknow lhe dancing Jights canlrip.
When you reach 3rd levei,you can casllhe faerie tire
spell once per day.When you reach 51hlevei,you can
also casl lhe darknessspell once per day.Charisma is
your spellcasling abilily forlhese spells.
Drow Weapon Training. Vouhave proficiency with
rapiers, shorlswords, and hand crossbows.
4 ,
THE DARKNEss OF THE DRow
Were ilnol forone renowned exceplion, lhe race ofdrow
would be universally reviled.lo mosl, lhey are a race of
demon-worshiping marauders dwelling inlhe sublerranean
deplhs oflhe Underdark, emerging onlyon lhe blackesl
nighls lo pillage and slaughler lhe surface dwellers lhey
despise.lheir sociely isdepraved and preoccupied wilh lhe
favor of Lollh,lheir spider-goddess, who sanclions murder
and lhe exlerminalion ofenlire families as noble houses
viefor posilion.
Yelone drow,alleasl, broke lhe mold. Inlhe world oflhe
Forgotten Realms, Drizzl Do'Urden, ranger oflhe North, has
proven his qualily as agood-hearted defender oflhe weak
and innocent. Rejecling his herilage and adrift inaworld lhal
looks upon himwilh lerror and loalhing, Drizzl isamodel
forlhose fewdrow who followinhis foolsleps, lrying lo find
alifeapart from lhe evilsociely oflheir Underdark homes.
Drowgrow up believing lhal surface-dwelling races are
inferior,worlhless excepl as slaves. Drowwho develop a
conscience or find ilnecessary lo cooperale wilh members of
olher races find ilhard lo overcome lhal prejudice, especially
when lhey are 50often on lhe receiving end ofhalred.
HALFLING
REGIS THE HALFLING, THE ONLY ONE OF HIS KIND FOR
hundreds ofmiles in a1lYdirection, /ocked hisfmgers be-
hind his head and /eaned back against the mos~ b/anket
of the tree trunk. Regis was short, even by the standards
of his diminutive roce, with thefluff of his curfy brawn
/ocks barefy cresting the three-foot mark, but his be/fy was
ampfy thickened by his love of agood mea/,arsevera/,as
the opportunities presented themse/ves. The crooked stick
that served ashisfishingpole rase up above him,c/enched
between two ofhis toes, and hungout over the quiet /ake,
mirrared perfectfy inthe glas~ surface of Maer Dua/don.
-R.A. Salvatore, The Crysta/ Shard
PART IIRACESThe comforts ofhome are the goals of mosthalflings'
lives:aplace tosettle inpeace and quiet, farfrom
marauding monsters and clashing armies; ablazing tire
and agenerous meal; finedrink and fineconversation.
Though some halflings liveout their daysinremote .
agricultural communities, others form nomadic bands
that traveiconstantly, lured bythe open road and the
wide horizon todiscover the wonders ofnew lands and
peoples. Buteven these wanderers lovepeace, food,
hearth, and home, though home might beawagon
jostling along an dirt road oraraft floatingdownriver.
SMALL ANO PRACTICAL
The diminutive halflings survive inaworld fulloflarger
creatures byavoiding notice or,barring that, avoiding
offense. Standing about 3feettall, theyappear re1atively
harmless and sohave managed tosurvive forcenturies
inthe shadow ofempires and onthe edges ofwars and
political strife. Theyare inclined tobestout, weighing
between 40and 45pounds.
Halflings' skin ranges fromtan topalewith aruddy
cast, and their hair isusually brown orsandy brown
and wavy.Theyhave brown or hazel eyes. Halflingmen
oftensport longsideburns, but beards are rare among
them and mustaches evenmore so.Theyliketowear
simple, comfortable, and practical clothes, favoring
bright colors.
Halfling practicality extends beyond their clothing.
They're concerned with basic needs and simple
pleasures and have littleuse forostentation. Eventhe
wealthiest ofhalflings keep their treasures locked ina
cellar rather than ondisplay foralitosee. Theyhave
aknack forfindingthe most straightforward solution
toaproblem, and havelittlepatience fordithering.
KINO ANO CURIOUS
Halflings are an affableand cheerful people. They
cherish the bonds offamilyand friendship as well
as the comforts ofhearth and home, harboring few
dreams ofgoldorglory.Evenadventurers among
them usually venture intothe world forreasons of
community, friendship, wanderlust, ar curiosity. They
lave discovering new things, even simpie things, such
as an exotic food ar an unfamiliar style of c1othing.
Halflings are easily moved to pity and hate to see any
living thing suffer. They are generous, happily sharing
what they have even in lean times.AFFABLE AN D POSITIVE
Halflings lry lo gel along wilh everyone else and are loalh lo
make sweeping generalizalions-especially negative ones.
Dwarves. "Dwarves make loyal friends, and you can counl
on lhem lo keep lheir word. Bul would il hurt lhem lo smile
once in a whilel"
Elves."They're 50beauliful! Their faces, lheir music, lheir
grace and alI. 11'5like they slepped oul of a wonderful dream.
Bul lhere's no lelling what's going on behind lheir smiling
faces-surely more lhan lhey ever let on."
Humans. "Humans are a 101like us, really.AIleasl some
of Ihem are. 51ep oul of lhe caslles and keeps, go lalk lo lhe
farmers and herders and you'll find good, solid folk. Nol lhal
lhere's anylhing wrong wilh lhe barons and soldiers-you
have lo admire lheir conviclion. And by prolecling lheir own
lands, lhey prolecl us as well."
A halfling has a given name, a family name, and possibly
a nickname. Family names are often nicknames that
stuck so tenaciously they have been passed down
through the generations.
Male Names: Alton, Ander, Cade, Corrin, Eldon, Errich,
Finnan, Garret, Lindal, Lyle, Merric, Milo, Osborn,
Perrin, Reed, Roscoe, Wellby
Female Names: Andry, Bree, Callie, Cora, Euphemia,
jillian, Kithri, Lavinia, Lidda, Merla, Nedda, Paela,
Portia, Seraphina, Shaena, Trym, Vani, Verna
Family Names: Brushgather, Goodbarrel, Greenbottle,
High-hill, Hilltopple, Leagallow, Tealeaf, Thorngage,
Tosscobble, UnderboughBLEND INTO THE CROWD
Halflings are adept at fitting into a community of
humans, dwarves, ar elves, making themselves valuable
and weJcome. The combination of their inherent stealth
and their unassuming nature helps halflings to avoid
unwanted attention.
Halflings work readily with others, and they are loyal
to their friends, whether halfling ar otherwise. They can
display remarkable ferocity when their friends, families,
ar communities are threatened.
PASTORAL PLEASANTRIES
Most halflings live in small, peaceful communities with
large farms and well-kept graves. They rarely build
kingdoms of their own ar even hold much land beyond
their quiet shires. They typically don't recognize any
sort of halfling nobility ar royalty, instead looking to
family elders to guide them. Families preserve their
traditional ways despite the rise and fali of empires.
Many halflings live among other races, where the
halflings' hard work and loyal outlook offer them
abundant rewards and creature comforts. Some halfling
communities travei as a way of life, driving wagons ar
guiding boats from place to place and maintaining no
permanent home.••
EXPLORING OPPORTUNITIES
Halflings usually seI out on the adventurer's path lo
defend lheir communities, support their friends, or
explore a wide and wonder-filled world. For them,
adventuring is less a career than an opportunity or
sometimes a necessity.
HALFLING NAMES•••
PART IIRACES27
HALFLING TRAITS
Yourhalfling character has anumber oftraits in
common with ali other halflings.
AbiJityScoreIncrease.YourDexterity score
increases by2.
Age.Ahalfling reaches adulthood at the age of
20 and generally lives into the middle ofhis or her
second century.
Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. Asarule,
they are good-hearted and kind, hate tosee others in
pain, and have no tolerance foroppression. They are
also veryorderly and traditional, leaning heavily on
the support oftheir community and the comfort of
their oldways.
Size.Halflings average about 3feet tall and weigh
about 40 pounds. Yoursize isSmall.
Speed.Yourbase walking speed is25 feel.
Lucky.When you rolla 1on an attack roll, ability
check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and must
use the new roll.
Brave.Vouhave advantage on saving throws against
being frightened.
Halfling Nimbleness. Voucan move through the
space ofanycreature that isofasize larger than yours.
PART I IRACESLanguages. Voucan speak, read, and write Common
and Halfling. The Halfling language isn't secret, but
halflings are loath toshare itwith others. They write
very little, so they don't have arich body ofliterature.
Their oral tradition. however, isverystrong. Almost ali
halflings speak Common toconverse with the people
inwhose lands they dwell or through which they .
are traveling.
Subrace.The two main kinds ofhalfling. lightfoot and
stout, are more like closely related families than true
suhraces. Choose one ofthese subraces.
LIGHTFOOT
Asalightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice,
even using other people as cover. You'reinclined tobe
affable and getalong wellwith others. Inthe Forgotten
Realms, lightfoot halflings have spread the farthest and
thus are the most common variety.
Lightfoots are more prone towanderlust than other
halflings. and often dwell alongside other races or take
up anomadic life.In the world ofGreyhawk. these
halflings are called hairfeet or tallfellows.
AbiJityScoreIncrease.YourCharisma score
increases by 1.
Naturally Stealthy. Voucan attempt tohide even
when you are obscured onlybyacreature that isatleast
one size larger than you.
STOUT
Asastout halfling. you're hardier than average and have
some resistance topoison. Some say that stouts have
dwarven blood. In the Forgotten Realms, these halflings
are called stronghearts. and they're most common
inthe south.
AbiJityScoreIncrease.YourConstitution score
increases by1.
Stout Resilience. Vouhave advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance
against poison damage.
•
HUMAN
THESE WERE THE STORIES OF A RESTLESS PEOPLE WHO
long ago took to the seas and rivers inlongboats.jirst to
pillage and terrorize, then to settle. Yet there was anenergy.
alove of adventure. that sangfrom every page. Long into
the night Liriel read. lighting candle after precious candle.
She'd never given much thought tohumans. but these
storiesfascinated her. In theseyellowed pages were tales of
bold heroes. strange andjierce animais. mighty primitive gods.
andamagic that was part andfabric ofthat distant land.
-Elaine Cunningham. Daughterofthe Drow
Inthereckonings of most worlds. humans are the
youngest of the common races. late toarrive on the
world scene and short-lived in comparison to dwarves.
elves. and dragons. Perhaps itis because of their shorter
lives that they strive to achieve as much as they can in
the years they are given. Or maybe they feel they have
something to prove to the elder races. and that's why
they build their mighty empires on the foundation of
conquest and trade. Whatever drives them. humans
are the innovators. the achievers. and the pioneers
of the worlds.
ABROAD SPECTRUM
With their penchant for migration and conquest.
humans are more physically diverse than other common
races. There is no typical humano An individual can
stand from 5 feet to a little over 6 feet tall and weigh
fram 125 to 250 pounds. Human skin shades range
fram nearly black to very pale. and hair colors from
black to blond (curly. kinky. or straight); males might
sport facial hair that is sparse or thick. A lot of humans
have a dash of nonhuman blood. revealing hints of elf.
ore, or other lineages. Humans reach adulthood in their
late teens and rarely live even a single century.VARIETY IN ALL THINGS
Humans are the most adaptable and ambitious people
among the common races. They have widely varying
tastes, morais, and customs in the many different lands
where they have settled. When they settle, though,
they stay: they build cities to last for the ages, and
great kingdoms that can persist for long centuries. An
individual human might have a relatively short life span,
but a human nation or culture preserves traditions
with origins far beyond the reach of any single human's
memory. They live fully in the present-making them
well suited to the adventuring life-but also plan for the
future, striving to leave a lasting legacy. Individually and
as a group, humans are adaptable opportunists, and
they stay alert to changing political and social dynamics.
PART IIRACES
3°EVERYONE'S SECONO-BEST FRIENOS
Just as readily as they mix with each other, humans mingle
with members of other races. They get along with almost
everyone, though they might not be close to many. Humans
serve as ambassadors, diplomats, magistrates, merchants,
and functionaries of ali kinds.
Dwa,ves. "They're stout folk, stalwart friends, and true to
their word. Their greed for gold is their downfall, though."
Elves. "ll's best not to wander into elven woods. They don't
like intruders, and you'll as likely be bewitched as peppered
with arrows. 5till, if an elf can get past that damned racial
pride and actually treat you like an equal, you can leam a lot
from them."
Ha/flings. "ll's hard to beat a meal in a halfling home, as
long as you don't crack your head on the ceiling-good food
and good stories in front of a nice, warm fire. Ifhalflings had
a shred of ambition, they might really amount to something."
~ ~
LASTING INSTITUTIONS
Where a single elf or dwarf might take on the
responsibility of guarding a speciallocation or a
powerful secret, humans found sacred orders and
institutions for such purposes. While dwarf c1ans and
halfling elders pass on the ancient traditions to each
new generation, human temples, governments, Iibraries,
and codes of law fixtheir lradilions in lhe bedrock of
history. Humans dream of immorlality, but (excepl for
lhose fewwho seek undeath or divine ascension to
escape dealh's c1utches)they achieve il by ensuring that
they will be remembered when lhey are gone.
Allhough some humans can be xenophobic, in
generallheir societies are inclusive. Human lands
welcome large numbers of nonhumans compared lo the
proporlion of humans who live in nonhuman lands.
EXEMPLARS OFAMBITION
Humans who seek advenlure are lhe mosl daring and
ambilious members ofa daring and ambilious race.
They seek to earn glory in the eyes of lheir fellows
byamassing power, wealth, and fame. More than
olher people, humans champion causes rather lhan
lerritories or groups.
HUMAN NAMES AND ETHNICITIES
Having so much more variely than olher cullures,
humans as a whole have no typical names. Some human
PARTtIRACESparents give their children names from olher languages,
such as Dwarvish or Elvish (pronounced more or less
correctly), bul mosl parenls give names that are Iinked
lo their region's cullure or lo lhe naming lraditions of
their ancestors.
The malerial cullure and physical characleristics
of humans can change wildly from region lo region.
In the Forgolten Realms, for example, lhe c101hing,
archileclure, cuisine, music, and Iilerature are different
in lhe norlhwestern lands of lhe Silver Marches than
in dislanl Turmish or Impillur to the easl-and even
more dislinclive in far-offKara-Tur. Human physical
characleristics, lhough, vary according lOlhe ancient
migrations of lhe earliesl humans, so lhallhe humans
of the Silver Marches have every possible varialion of
coloralion and features.
In the Forgotten Realms, nine human elhnic groups
are widely recognized, lhough over a dozen olhers are
found in more localized areas of Faerun. These groups,
and lhe lypical names of lheir members, can be used as
inspiralion no matter which world your human is in.
CALISHITE
Shorler and slighler in build than mosIolher humans,
Calishites have dusky brown skin, hair, and eyes.
They're found primarily in soulhwest Faerun.
Calishite Names: (Male) Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid.
Khemed. Mehmen. Sudeiman, Zasheir; (female)
Alala, Ceidil. Hama, Jasmal, Meilil,Seipora, Yasheira,
Zasheida; (surnames) Basha, Dumein,Jassan, Khalid.
Moslana. Pashar, Rein
CHONDATHAN
Chondalhans are slender, lawny-skinned folk wilh
brown hair that ranges from almosl blond lo almost
black. Most are tall and have green or brown eyes,
but lhese trails are hardly universal. Humans of
Chondalhan descenl dominale the centrallands of
Faerun, around the Inner Sea.
Chondathan Names: (Male) Darvin, Dorn, Evendur,
Gorstag, Grim, Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal,
Stedd; (female) Arveene, Esvele, jhessail, Kerri,
Lureene, Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele; (surnames)
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood,
Greycastle, Tallstag
DAMARAN
Found primarily in the northwest ofFaerún, Damarans
are ofmoderate height and build, with skin hues
ranging from tawny tofair.Their hair isusually brown
ar black, and their eye colar varies widely, though brown
ismost common.
Damaran Names: (Male) Bar, Fadei, Glar, Grigor,
Igan, Ivor,Kosef, MivaI,Orei, Pavel, Sergor; (female)
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana,
Zora; (surnames) Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov,
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag
ILLUSKAN
IIluskans are tall, fair-skinned folkwith blue ar steely
grayeyes. Most have raven-black hair, but those who
inhabit the extreme northwest have blond, red, ar
lightbrown hair.
I1Iuskan Names: (Male)Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath,
Geth, Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth;
(female) Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga,
Silifrey, Westra; (surnames) Brightwood, Helder.
Hornraven, Lackman, Stormwind. WindrivverSHOU
The Shou are the most numerous and powerful ethnic
groJ
pin Kara-Tur, far tothe east ofFaerún. They are
yellowish-bronze in hue, with black hair and dark
eyes. Shou surnames are usually presented before
the given name.
Shou Names: (Male) An, Chen, Chi, Fai,jiang, Jun,
Lian, Long, Meng, On, Shan, Shui, Wen; (female)
Bai, Chao,jia, Lei, Mei,Qiao, Shui, Tai;(surnames)
Chien, Huang, Kao, Kung, Lao, Ling, Mei, Pin, Shin,
Sum, Tan, Wan
TETHYRIAN
Widespread along the entire Sword Coast at the
western edge ofFaerún, Tethyrians are ofmedium build
and height, with dusky skin that tends to grow fairer
the farther north they dwell. Their hair and eye colar
varies widely, but brown hair and blue eyes are the most
common. Tethyrians primarily use Chondathan names.
TURAMI
Native tothe southern shore ofthe Inner Sea, the
Turami people are generally tall and muscular, with
dark mahogany skin, curly black hair, and dark eyes.
Turami Names: (Male)Anton, Diero. Marcon, Pieron,
Rimardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero; (female) Balama,
Dona, Faila,jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise,
Vonda; (surnames) Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine,
Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo
PART 1 RACESHUMAN TRAITS
It's hard tomake generalizations about humans, but
your human character has these traits.
Ability Score Increase. Yourability scores each
increase by I.
Age.Humans reach adulthood in their late teens and
liveless than acentury.
AJignment. Humans tend toward no
particular alignment. The best and the worst are
found among them.
Size.Humans vary widely inheight and build, from
barely 5feet towell over 6feet tall. Regardless ofyour
position in that range. your size isMedium.
Speed.Yourbase walking speed is30 fee!.
Languages. Voucan speak, read, and write Common
and one extra language ofyour choice. Humans typically
learn the languages ofother peoples they deal with,
including obscure dialects. They are fond ofsprinkling
their speech with words borrowed from other tongues:
Orc curses, Elvish musical expressions, Dwarvish
military phrases, and so on.
3'••
VARIANT HUMAN TRAITS
Ifyour eampaign uses the optional feat rules fram ehapter 5,
your Dungeon Master might allow these varianttraits, ali of
whieh replaee the human's Ability Seore Inerease trai!.
Ability Score Increase. Two different ability seores of your
ehoiee inerease by l.
Skills.Vou gain profieieney in one skill ofyour ehoiee.
Feat.Vougain one feat of your ehoiee.••MULAN
Dominant inthe eastern and southeastern shores of
the lnner Sea, the Mulan are generally tall, slim, and
amber-skinned, with eyes ofhazel ar brown. Their hair
ranges from black todark brown, but in the lands where
the Mulan are most prominent, nobles and many other
Mulan shave of[ali their hair.
Mulan Names: (Male)Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki,
Kethoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De,
Urhur; (female) Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara,
Murithi, Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis; (surnames)
Ankhalab, Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem,
Sepret, Uuthrakt
RASHEMI
Most often found east ofthe Inner Sea and often
intermingled with the Mulan, Rashemis tend tobe short,
stout, and muscular. They usually have dusky skin, dark
eyes, and thick black hair.
Rashemi Names: (Male) Borivik, Faurgar,jandar,
Kanithar, Madislak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak;
(female) Fyevarra, Hulmarra, Immith, Imzel,
Navarra, Shevarra, Tammith, Yuldra; (surnames)
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara,
Stayanoga, Ulmokina
32DRAGONBORN
HER FATHER STOOD ON THE FIRST OF THE THREE STAIRS
that led dawnfrom the parta I, unmoving. Thescales of his
face had grown paler around the edges, but Clanless Mehen
stil/ looked as if he could wrestle down a dire bear him-
seif.Hisfamiliar wel/-worn armor was gone, replaced by
violet-tinted scale armor with bright silvery tracings. There
was a blazononhis arm as wel/, the mark of someforeign
house. The sword at his back was the same, though, the one
he had carried since even before he hadfound the twins left
inswaddling at the gates of Arush Vayem.
PART 1IRACESFor al/ her life, Farideh had known that reading her
father'sface was a skill she'd beenfortunate tolearn. A
human who couldn't spot the shift of her eyes orHavilar's
would certain(y see on(y the indifference of a dragon in
Clanless Mehen'sface. But the shift of scales, the arch of a
ridge, the set of his eyes, the gape of his teeth-her father's
face spoke volumes.
But every scale of it, this time, seemed complete(y stil/-
the indifference of a dragon, even toFarideh.
-Erin M. Evans, TheAdversary
Born ofdragons, as their name proclaims, the
dragonborn walk proudly through aworld that greets
them with fearful incomprehension. Shaped bydraconic
godsOI'the dragons themselves, dragonborn originally
hatched from dragon eggs as aunique race, combining
the best attributes ofdragons and humanoids. Some
dragonborn are faithful servants totrue dragons, others
form the ranks ofsoldiers ingreat wars, and still others
findthemselves adrift, with noclear calling inlife.
PROUD DRAGON KIN
Dragonborn lookverymuch like dragons standing erect
in humanoid form, though they lack wings or atai!. The
first dragonborn had scales ofvibrant hues matching
the colors oftheir dragon kin, but generations of
interbreeding have created amore uniform appearance.
Their small, finescales are usually brass orbronze
incolar, sometimes ranging toscarlet, rust, gold,ar
copper-green. They are tall and strongly built, often
standing close to 6'hfeet tall and weighing 300 pounds
ar more. Their hands and feet are strong, talonlike
claws with three fingers and athumb on each hand.
The blood ofaparticular type ofdragon runs
very strong through some dragonborn clans. These
dragonborn often boast scales that more closely match
those oftheir dragon ancestor-bright red, green, blue,
orwhite, lustrous black, ar gleaming metallic gold,
silver, brass, copper, or bronze.
SELF-SUFFICIENT CLANS
To any dragonborn. the dan is more important than
life itself. Dragonborn owe their devotion and respect
to their dan above ali e1se, even the gods. Each
dragonborn's conduct reflects on the honor of his or her
dan, and bringing dishonor to the dan can result in
expulsion and exile. Each dragonborn knows his or her
station and duties within the dan, and honor demands
maintaining the bounds of that position.
A continuaI drive for self-improvement reflects the
self-sufficiency of the race as a whole. Dragonborn value
skill and excellence in ali endeavors. They hate to fai!.
and they push themselves to extreme efforts before they
give up on something. A dragonborn holds mastery of
a particular skill as a lifetime goal. Members of other
races who share the same commitment find it easy to
earn the respect of a dragonborn.
Though ali dragonborn strive to be self-sufficient,
they recognize that help is sometimes needed in difficult
situations. But the best source for such heJp is the
dan, and when a dan needs help. it turns to another
dragonborn dan before seeking aid from other races-
or even fram the gods.
DRAGONBORN NAMES
Dragonborn have personal names given at birth,
but they put their dan names first as a mark Df
honor. A chi!dhood na me or nickname is often used
among dutchmates as a descriptive term or a term
of endearment. The name might recall an event or
center on a habit.
Male Names: Arjhan. Balasar. Bharash, Donaar, Ghesh.
Heskan, Kriv. Medrash. Mehen. Nadarr. Pandjed,
Patrin, Rhogar, Shamash. Shedinn. Tarhun. Torinn
Female Names: Akra. Biri. Daar. Farideh, Harann.
HaviJar, Jheri, Kava, Korinn. Mishann, NaJa, Perra,
Raiann. Sora. Surina. Thava, UadjitUNCOMMON RACES
lhe dragonborn and the rest ofthe raees in this ehapter are
uneommon. lhey don't exist in everyworid of D&D,and
even where they are found. they are less widespread than
dwarves. elves. halAings. and humans.
In the cosmopolitan eities ofthe D&Dmultiverse, most
peopie hardly look twiee at members of even the most
exotie raees. But the small towns and villages that dot
the countryside are different. lhe common folkaren't
accustomed to seeing members ofthese races, and they
reaet accordingly.
Dragonborn. Irs easy to assume that a dragonborn is a
monster, especially ifhis or her scaies betray a ehromatic
heritage. Unless the dragonborn starts breathing fire and
causing destruction. though, peopie are likelyto respond
with eaution rather than outright fear.
Gnome.Gnomes don't look likea threat and ean quickly
disarm suspieion with good humor. lhe eommon folkare
often eurious about gnomes, likelynever having seen one
before. but they are rarely hostile or fearful.
HalfEIf.Although many people have never seen a haif-elf.
virtually everyone knows they exist. Ahalf.elf stranger's
arrival is followed bygossip behind the half.elf's baek and
stoien glanees aeross the eommon room, rather than any
confrontation ar open curiosity.
HalfOrc. Irs usually safe to assume that a half.ore is
belligerent and quiek to anger, so peopie wateh themselves
around an unfamiliar half-ore. Shopkeepers might
surreptitiously hide valuable or fragile goods when a haif-ore
comes in. and peopie slowly clear out of a tavern, assuming a
fight willbreak out soon.
riefling.Haif.ores are greeted with a praetieal caution, but
tieAings are the subjeet of supernatural fear.lhe evilof their
heritage is plainly visibie in their features. and as far as most
people are eoneerned, a tieAing eould verywell be a devil
straight from the Nine Hells. People might make warding
signs as a tieAing approaehes, eross the street to avoid
passing near, or bar shop doors before a tieAing ean enter.
33
Childhood Names: Climber. Earbender. Leaper. Pious.
Shieldbiter. Zealous
Clan Names: Clethtinthiallor. Daardendrian. Delmirev.
Drachedandion. Fenkenkabradon. Kepeshkmolik.
Kerrhylon. Kimbatuul. Linxakasendalor. Myastan.
Nemmonis. Norixius. Ophinshtalajiir. Prexijandilin.
Shestendeliath. Turnuroth. Verthisathurgiesh. Yarjerit
DRAGONBORN TRAITS•••
DRACONIANS
In the Dragonlance selling, lhe followers of the evil goddess
Takhisis learned a dark ritual that let them corrupt the
eggs of metallic dragons. producing evil dragonborn called
draconians. Five types of draconians. corresponding to the
five types of metallic dragons, fought for Takhisis in the War
ofthe Lance: auraks (gold). baaz (brass), bozak (bronze).
kapak (copper). and sivak (silver). In place of their draconic
breath weapons, they have unique magical abilities.
•••••
••
Yourdraconic heritage manifests inavariety oftraits
you share with other dragonborn.
Ability Score Increase. YourStrength score
increases by2.and your Charisma score increases by 1.
Age.Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk
hours after hatching. altain the size and development
ofa IO-year-old human child bythe age of3.and reach
adulthood by 15.They Iivetobe around 80.
AJignment. Dragonborn tend toextremes. making a
conscious choice for one side or the other inthe cosmic
war between good and evil(represented byBahamut
and Tiamat. respectively). Most dragonborn are good.
but those who side with Tiamat can be terrible villains.
Size.Dragonborn are taller and heavier than humans.
standing well over 6feet tall and averaging almost 250
pounds. Yoursize isMedium.
Speed.Yourbase walking speed is 30 feet.
DRACONIC ANCESTRY
Dragon Damage Type Brealh Weapon
Black Acid 5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save)
Blue Lightning 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Brass Fire 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Bronze Lightning 5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
Copper Acid 5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save)
Gold Fire 15ft. cone (Dex. save)
Green Poison 15 ft. cone (Con. save)
Red Fire 15 fI. cone (Dex. save)
Silver Cold 15 fI. cone (Con. save)
White Cold 15fI. cone (Con. save)DraconicAncestry. Vouhave draconic ancestry.
Choose one type ofdragon from the Draconic Ancestry
table. Yourbreath weapon and damage resistance are
determined bylhe dragon type. as shown in the table.
Breath Weapon. Voucan use your action toexhale
destructive energy. Yourdraconic ancestry determines
the size, shape. and damage type ofthe exhalation.
When you use your breath weapon, each creature in
the area ofthe exhalation must make asaving throw.
the type ofwhich isdetermined byyour draconic
ancestry. The DC for this saving throw equals 8 +
your Constitution modifier +your proficiency bonus. A
creature takes 2d6 damage on afailed save. and half
as much damage on a successful one. The damage
increases to3d6 at 6th levei. 4d6 at 11thleveI,and 5d6
at 16th leveI.
After you use your breath weapon, you can't use it
again until you complete ashort or long resl.
Damage Resistance. Vouhave resistance tothe
damage type associated with your draconic ancestry.
Languages. Voucan speak. read, and write Common
and Draconic. Draconic isthought tobe one ofthe
oldest languages and isoften used in the study ofmagic.
The language sounds harsh tomost other creatures and
includes numerous hard consonants and sibilants.
GNOME
SKINNY AND FLAXEN-HAIRED, HIS SKIN
walnut brown and hiseyesastartling
turquoise. Burgellstood halfastallasAeron an ad to
climbuponastooltolookout thepeephole. Likemost hab-
itationsinOeble.thatparticular tenement had been built
for humans, andsmaller residentscoped with theresulting
awkwardness asbestthey could.
Butatleasttherelativelargenessofthe apartment gave
Burgellroom topackinalihisgnome-sized gear.Thefront
room washisworkshop. and itcontained abewildering
miscellany oftools:hammers. chisels.saws. lockpicks,
tinted lenses.jeweler's loupes. andjars ofpowdered and
shredded ingredientsfor castingspells.Afat gray cat. the
mage'sfamiliar, laycurledatop a grimoire.Ttopenedits
eyes.gaveAeron adisdainjulyellow stare. then appeared
togobacktosleep.
-Richard Lee Byers, TheBlackBouquet
Aconstant hum ofbusy activity pervades the warrens
and neighborhoods where gnomes form their close-
knit communities. Louder sounds punctuate the hum:
a crunch ofgrinding gears here, a minor explosion
there, a yelp ofsurprise or triumph, and especially
bursts of laughter. Gnomes take de!ight in !ife,enjoying
every moment ofinvention, exploration, investigation,
creation, and play.
VIBRANT EXPRESSION
Agnome's energy and enthusiasm for living shines
through every inch of his or her tiny body. Gnomes
average slightly over 3 feet tall and weigh 40 to 45
pounds. Their tan or brown faces are usually adorned
with broad smiles (beneath their prodigious noses),
and their bright eyes shine with excitement. Theirfair hair has a tendency to stick out in every direction,
as ifexpressing the gnome's insatiable interest in
everything around.
Agnome's persona!ity is writ large in his or ber
appearance. Amale gnome's beard, in contrast to
his wild hair, is kept carefully trimmed but often
styled into curious forks or neat points. Agnome's
clothing, though usually made in modest earth tones,
is elaborately decorated with embroidery, embossing,
or gleaming jewels.
DELIGHTED DEDICATION
As far as gnomes are concerned, being a!ive is a
wonderful thing, and they squeeze every ounce of
enjoyment out oftheir three to tivecenturies of!ife.
Humans might wonder about getting bored over the
course ofsuch a long tife, and elves take plenty of time
to savor the beauties ofthe world in their long years, but
gnomes seem to worry that even with ali that time, they
can't get in enough ofthe things they want to do and see.
Gnomes speak as ifthey can't get the thoughts
out oftheir heads fast enough. Even as they offer
ideas and opinions on a range ofsubjects, they still
manage to listen carefully to others, adding the
appropriate exclamations ofsurprise and appreciation
along the way.
PART I RACES
35
Though gnomes lovejokes ofali kinds, particularly
puns and pranks, they're just as dedicaled lo lhe more
serious tasks they undertake, Many gnomes are skilled
engineers, alchemists, tinkers, and inventors, They're
willing tomake mistakes and laugh at themselves in
lhe process ofperfecting what they do, taking bold
(sometimes foolhardy) risks and dreaming large,
BRIGHT BURROWS
Gnomes make their homes in hilly,wooded lands. They
liveunderground but get more fresh air than dwarves
do, enjoying the natural, living world on the surface
whenever lhey can, Their homes are well hidden by
bolh elever conslruclion and simple illusions, Welcome
visitors are quickly ushered inlo lhe bright, warm
burrows, Those who are not welcome are unlikely to
find the burrows in lhe first place,
Gnomes who setlle in human lands are commonly
gemcutlers, engineers, sages, or tinkers. Some human
families relain gnome lutors, ensuring lhat their pupils
enjoy a mix ofserious learning and delighted enjoyment.
Agnome mighl tutor severa Igeneralions ofa single
human family over the course ofhis or her long life.
GNOME NAMES
Gnomes love names, and most have half a dozen or so.
Agnome's mother, falher, elan elder, aunts, and uneles
each give the gnome a name, and various nicknames
from juSl about everyone else might or might not stick
over time. Gnome names are typically variants on the
names ofancestors or distant relalives, lhough some
are purely new inventions. When dealing with humans
and others who are "stuffy" aboul names, a gnome
learns to use no more than three names: a personal
name, a elan name, and a nickname, choosing lhe one in
each calegory that's the most fun tosay.
PART I IRACESDEEP GNOMES
A third subrace of gnomes, the deep gnomes (or svirfneblin),
live in small communities scattered in the Underdark. Unlike
the duergar and the drow, svirfneblin are as good as their
surface cousins. However, their humor and enthusiasm
are dampened by their oppressive environment, and their
inventive expertise is directed mostly toward stonework.
~ ~
Male Names: Alston, Alvyn, Boddynock, Brocc, Burgell,
Dimble, Eldon, Erky, Fonkin, Frug, Gerbo, Gimble,
Glim,Jebeddo, Kellen, Namfoodle, Orryn, Roondar,
Seebo, Sindri, Warryn, Wrenn, Zook
Female Names: Bimpnollin, Breena, Caramip, Carlin,
Donella, Duvamil, ElIa, ElIyjobell, ElIywick, Lilli,
Loopmottin, Lorilla, Mardnab, Nissa, Nyx, Oda, Orla,
Roywyn, Shamil, Tana, Waywocket, Zanna
Clan Names: Beren, Daergel, Folkor, Garrick, Nackle,
Murnig, Ningel, Raulnor, Scheppen, Timbers, Turen
Nicknames: Aleslosh, Ashhearlh, Badger, Cloak,
Doublelock, Filchbatler, Fnipper, Ku, Nim, Oneshoe,
Pock, Sparklegem, Stumbleduck
SEEING THE WORLD
Curious and impulsive, gnomes might take up
adventuring as a way to see the world ar for lhe lave
ofexploring. As lovers ofgems and other fine ilems,
some gnomes take toadventuring as aquick, if
dangerous, path to wealth. Regardless ofwhat spurs
them loadventure, gnomes who adopt this way oflife
eke as much enjoymenl out ofitas they do oul ofany
other activity they undertake, sometimes to lhe great
annoyance oflheir adventuring companions.
GNOME TRAITS
Your gnome character has certain characteristics in
common with ali other gnomes.
Ability Scare lncrease. Your Intelligence score
increases by2.
Age.Gnomes mature at lhe same rate humans do, and
most are expected to settle down into an adult lifeby
around age 40. They can live350 to almosl 500 years.
Alignment. Gnomes are most oflen good. Those who
lend toward law are sages, engineers, researchers,
scholars, invesligators, ar inventors. Those who lend
toward chaos are minslrels, lrickslers, wanderers,
ar fandful jewelers. Gnomes are good-hearted, and
, UI
AbiJity ScoreIncrease. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
Artificer's Lore. Whenever you make an Intelligence
(History) check related to magic items, alchemical
objects, ar technological devices, you can add twice your
proficiency bonus, instead of any proficiency bonus you
normallyappIy.
Tinker. Vou have proficiency with artisan's toois
(tinker's tools). Using those tools, you can spend 1
hour and 10 gp worth of materiaIs to construct a Tiny
c1ockwork device (AC 5, 1 hp). The device ceases
to function after 24 hours (unless you spend 1 hour
repairing it to keep the device functioning), ar when
you use your action to dismantle it; at that time, you can
reclaim the materiaIs used to create il. Vou can have up
to three such devices active at a time.
When you create a device, choose one of the
following options:
Clockwork Toy. This toy is a c1ockwork animal, monster,
ar person, such as a frog, mouse, bird, dragon, ar
soldier. When placed on the grou nd, the toy moves
5 feet across the ground on each of your turns in a
random direction. lt makes noises as appropriate
to the creature it represents.
Fire Starter. The device produces a miniature
flame, which you can use to light a candle,
torch, ar campfire. Using the device
requires your action.
Music Sox. When opened, this music box
plays a single song at a moderate volume.
The box stops playing when it
reaches the song's end ar
when it is c1osed.FOREST GNOME
As a forest gnome, you have a natural knack for iIlusion
and inherent quickness and stealth. In the worlds of
0&0, forest gnomes are rare and secretive. They gather
in hidden communities in sylvan forests, using iIlusions
and trickery to conceal themselves from threats ar
to mask their escape should they be detected. Forest
gnomes tend to be friendly with other good-spirited
woodland folk, and they regard elves and good feyas
their most important allies. These gnomes also befriend
small forest animais and rely on them for information
about threats that might prowl their lands.
Ability ScoreIncrease. Your Oexterity score
increases by 1.
Natural I1lusionist. Vou know the minor illusion
cantrip. lntelligence is your spellcasting ability for il.
Speak with Small Beasts. Through sounds and
gestures, you can communicate simple ideas with Small
ar smaller beasts. Forest gnomes love animaIs and often
keep squirrels, badgers, rabbits, moles, woodpeckers,
and other creatures as beloved pets.
ROCK GNOME
As a rock gnome, you have a natural inventiveness and
hardiness beyond that of other gnomes. Most gnomes
in the worlds of 0&0 are rock gnomes, including the
tinker gnomes of the Oragonlance setting.4 •
ALWAYS ApPRECIATIVE
It's rare for a gnome to be hostile ar malicious unless he
ar she has suffered a grievous injury. Gnomes know that
most races don't share their sense of humor, but they enjoy
anyone's company just as they enjoy everything else they set
out to do.
~ ~
even the tricksters among them are more playful
than vicious.
Size. Gnomes are between 3 and 4 feet tall and
average about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't
discern colar in darkness, only shades of gray.
Gnome Cunning. Vou have advantage on ali
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws
against magic.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Gnomish. The Gnomish language, which uses the
Owarvish script, is renowned for its technical treatises
and its catalogs of knowledge about the natural world.
Subrace. Two subraces of gnomes are found among
the worlds of 0&0: forest gnomes and rock gnomes.
Choose one of these subraces.
HALF-ELF
FUNT SQUINTED INTO THE SETTING SUN. HE THOUGHT
he saw theftgure of aman striding up thepath. 5tanding,
Flintdrew back into theshadow of atallpine tosee better.
The man's walk was marked by aneasygrace-an eluish
grace, Flintwould haue said;yet the man's body had lhe
thickness and tight muscles of ahuman, while thefacial
hair was deftnite/y humankind's. Ali the dwarf could see
of the man'sface beneath agreen hood was tan skin and a
brownish-red beard. A longbow wasslung ouerone shoulder
andasword hung athisleftside. Hewas dressed insoft
leather, careful/y tooled intheintricate designs the elues
loued. But noelfin the world of Krynn could grow abeard
... noelf, but ...
PART 1IRACES"Tanis?" saidFlinthesitant/y asthe man neared.
"Thesame." Thenewcomer's beardedface split in awide
grin.Heheld open his arms and, before the dwarf could
stop him, engulfed Flint in ahug that lifted him off the
ground. Thedwarf clasped hisoldfriend closefor abrief
instant, then, rememberinghis digni(y,squirmed andfreed
himselffrom lhehalf-elf's embrace.
-Margaret Weis and Tracy Hickman,
Dragons ofAutumn Twilight
Walking in two worlds but truly belonging to neither,
half-elves combine what some say are the best qualities
of their elf and human parents: human curiosity,
inventiveness, and ambition tempered by the refined
senses, love of nature, and artistic tastes of the elves.
Some half-elves Iiveamong humans, set apart by their
emotional and physical differences, watching friends
and loved ones age while time barely touches them.
Others Iivewith the elves, growing restless as they
reach adulthood in the timeless elven realms, while
their peers continue to Iiveas children. Many half-elves,
unable to fit into either society, choose Iives of solitary
wandering or join with other misfits and outcasts in
the adventuring life.
OF Two WORLDS
To humans, half-elves look Iike elves, and to elves, they
look humano In height, they're on par with both parents,
though they're neither as slender as elves nor as broad
as humans. They range fram under 5 feet to about 6 feet
talI,and from 100 to 180 pounds, with men only slightly
talIer and heavier than women. Half-elf men do have
facial hair, and sometimes grow beards to mask their
elven ancestry. Half-elven coloration and features lie
somewhere between their human and elf parents, and
thus sh'ow a variety even more pronounced than that
found among either race. They tend to have the eyes
of their elven parents.
PART 1 RACES
39EXCELLENT AM BASSADORS
Manyhalf.elves leam at an earlyage to get along with
everyone, defusing hostility and finding common ground.
Asa race, they have elven grace wilhoul elven aloofness and
human energy wilhout human boorishness. Theyoflen make
excellenl ambassadors and go.belweens (excepl between
elves and humans, since each side suspecls lhe half.elf
offavoring lhe olher).
crealive expression, demonstrating neither love
ofJeaders nor desire forfollowers. They chafe at
rules, resenl others' demands, and sometimes prove
unreliable, or at least unpredictable.
Size.HaIf-eIves are about the same size as humans,
ranging from 5to6feet taIl.Voursize isMedium.
Speed.Vourbase walking speed is30 feel.
Darkvision. Thanks toyour elfblood, you have
superior vision indark and dim conditions. Voucan
see indim light within 60 feet ofyou as ifitwere bright
light, and indarkness as ifitwere dim lighl. Voucan't
discern color indarkness, onlyshades ofgray.
FeyAncestry. Vouhave advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can't putyou tosleep.
Skill VersatiJity. Vougain proficiency intwo skilIs
ofyour choice.
Languages. Voucan speak, read, and write Common,
EIvish, and one extra language ofyour choice,
HALF- ELF TRAITS
Vourhalf-elf character has some qualities incommon
with elves and some that are unique tohalf-elves.
AbiJity Score Increase. VourCharisma score
increases by2,and two other ability scores ofyour
choice increase by I.
Age.Half-elves mature atthe same rate humans
do and reach adulthood around the age of20.They
livemuch longer than humans, however, often
exceeding 180years.
AJignment. Half-elves share the chaotic bent oftheir
elven heritage. They value both personal freedom andHALF- ELF NAMESDIPLOMATS ORWANDERERS
Half-elves have nolands oftheir own, though they are
welcome inhuman cities and somewhat less welcome
inelven forests. Inlarge cities inregions where elves
and humans interact often, half-elves are sometimes
numerous enough toform small communities oftheir
own. They enjoy the company ofother half-elves, the
onIypeople who truIy understand what itistolive
between these two worlds.
In most parts ofthe world. though, haIf-eIves are
uncommon enough that one might liveforyears
without meeting another. Some half-elves prefer to
avoid company altogether, wandering the wilds as
trappers, foresters, hunters, or adventurers and visiting
civilization onIyrarely. Like elves, they are driven by
the wanderIust that comes oftheir longevity. Others,
incontrast, throw themselves into the thick ofsociety,
putting their charisma and social skilIs togreat use
indiplomatic roles or as swindlers.
Half-elves use either human or elven naming
conventions. Asiftoemphasize that they don't really fit
intoeither society, half-elves raised among humans are
often given elven names, and those raised among elves
often take human names.
4-0THE WARCHIEF MHURREN ROUSED HIMSELF FROM HIS
sleeping-furs and his women and pulled a short hauberk
of heauy steel ringsouer his thick. well-muscled torso. He
usual{y rose before most of his warriors. sincehe had a
strong streak of human blood inhim. and hefound the
daylight lessbothersome than most of his tribe did.Among
the Bloody Skulls. a warrior wasjudged by his strength. his
jlerceness. and his wits. Human ancestry was no blemish
againstawarrior-prauided he was euery bit asstrang.
enduring. and bloodthirsty ashisfull-blooded kin. Half-
orcs who were weaker than their orc comrades didn't last
long among the Bloody Skulls OI'any other orc tribefor
that matter. Rut itwas often true that a bit of human blood
gaveawarriorjust the right mix of cunning. ambition, and
self-discipline togofar indeed. asMhurren had. He was
master ofatribe that could muster two thousand spears.
and the strangest chiefin TlJar.
-Richard Baker. Swordmage
PART I IRACESWhether united under the leadership ofa mighty
warloek OI'having fought to astandstill after years
ofeonfliet, ore and human tribes sometimes form
allianees, joining forces into a larger horde lo lhe terror
ofeivilized lands nearby. When lhese allianees are
sealed bymarriages, half-ores are bom. Some half-ores
rise lo beeome proud ehiefs ofore lribes, lheir human
blood giving them an edge over lheir full-blooded ore
rivaIs. Some venture inlo lhe world lo prove lheir worlh
among humans and other more civilized raees. Many of
lhese beeome advenlurers, aehieving grealness forlheir
mighly deeds and nOloriely for their barbarie eustoms
and savage fury.
SCARRED AND STRONG
Half-ores' grayish pigmenlation, sloping foreheads,
juttingjaws, prominenl leelh, and lowering builds make
their orcish herilage plain forali losee. Half-ores sland
belween 6 and 7feel lall and usually weigh belween
180 and 250 pounds.
Ores regard battle sears as lokens ofpride and
ornamenlal sears as lhings ofbeauly. OlheI' sears,
though, mark an ore 01'half-ore as a formeI' slave 01'
a disgraeed exile. Any half-ore who has lived among
01'near ores has sears, whelher lhey are marks of
humilialion 01'ofpride, reeounling their pasl exploils
and injuries. Sueh a half-oreliving among humans might
display lhese sears proudly 01'hide them inshame.
THE MARK OF GRUUMSH
The one-eyed god Gruumsh erealed lhe ores, and even
those ores who turn away from his worship ean'l fully
escape his influenee. The same is lrue ofhaIf-ores.
lhough lheir human blood moderales lhe impaet oflheir
orcish heritage. Some half-ores hear the whispers of
Gruumsh in lheir dreams, ealling lhem lo unleash lhe
rage tha! simmers wilhin lhem. Others feel Gruumsh's
exultation when they join in melee eombat-and either
exult along with him or shiver with fear and loathing.
Half-ores are not evil by nature, but evil does lurk within
them, whether they embraee it or rebel against it.
Beyond the rage of Gruumsh, half-ores feel emotion
powerfully. Rage doesn't jusl quieken their pulse, it
makes their bodies burn. An insult stings tike acid,
and sadness saps their strength. But they laugh loudly
and heartily, and simple bodily pleasures-feasting,
drinking, wrestling, drumming, and wild dancing-fill
their hearls with joy. They tend to be short-tempered
and sometimes sullen, more inclined to aelion than
eontemplation and to fighting than arguing. The mosl
aeeomplished half-ores are lhose with enough self.
eontrol to get by in a civilized land.
TRIBES AND SLUMS
Half-ores most often live among ores. Of the other raees,
humans are most tikely to aeeept half.ores, and half.
ores almost always live in human lands when not living
among ore lribes. Whether proving themselves among
rough barbarian tribes or serabbling to survive in the
slums of larger cities, half-ores gel by on their physieal
might, their enduranee, and lhe sheer determinalion
lhey inheril from lheir human aneeslry.
HALF-ORC NAMES
Half-ores usually have names appropriate lo the eullure
in whieh they were raised. A half-ore who wanls lo fit in
among humans mighl trade an ore name for a human
name. Some half-ores wilh human names decide to
adopt a guttural ore name beeause they lhink it makes
lhem more intimidating.
Male Ore Names: Deneh, Feng, Gell, Henk, Holg, Imsh,
Kelh, Krusk, Mhurren, Ront. Shump. Thokk
Female Ore Names: Baggi, Emen, Engong. Kansif.
Myev.Neega. Ovak, Ownka, Shaulha, Sulha. Vola,
Volen, Yevelda
HALF-ORC TRAITS
Your half-ore eharaeter has eertain traits deriving from
your ore aneestry.GRUDGING ACCEPTANCE
Eaeh half.ore finds a way to gain aeeeptanee from those who
hate ores. Some are reserved, trying not to draw atlention to
themselves. A few demonstrate piety and good.heartedness
as publicly as they ean (whether ar not sueh demonstrations
are genuine). And some simply try to be so tough that others
just avoid them.••
Abi/ity Scorelncrease. Your Strength seore
inereases by 2, and your Constitution score
inereases by I.
Age.Half-ores mature a tittle faster than humans,
reaehing adulthood around age 14.They age
notieeably faster and rarely tive longer than 75 years.
Alignment. Half-ores inherit a tendeney toward ehaos
from their ore parents and are not strongly inclincd
toward good. Half-ores raised among ores and willillg
to tive out their tives among them are usually evil.
Size.Half-ores are somewhat largcr and bulkier than
humans, and they range from 5 to well over tifeet tall.
Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks to your ore blood. you have
superior vision in dark and dim eOllditions. Vouean
see in dim tight within 60 feet ofyou as if it were bright
tight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. Youean't
diseern eolor in darkness, only shades of gray.
Menacing. You gain proficieney in the
Intimidation skill.
Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to
Ohit points but not killed outright. you can drop to I hit
point instead. Voucan't use this feature again unti! you
finish a long resto
Savage Attacks. When you score a criticaI hit with
a melee weapon attack, you can roll one of thc wcapon's
damage dice one additional time and add it lo lhe extra
damage of lhe criticaI hit.
Languages. Youcan speak. read, and
write Common and Ore. Ore is a
harsh. grating language with
hard consonants. It has
no script of its own
but is written in the
Dwarvish script.
42TIEFLING
"BUT VOU DO SEE THE WAY PEOPLE LOOK AT VOU,
devil's child."
Thoseblock eyes,cold asa winter storm, were staring
right into her heart and thesudden seriousness inhis
voicejolted her.
"Whatisit they say?" heasked. "One'sa curiosity, two's
a conspiracy-"
"Three's a curse," shefinished. "You think Ihaven't heard
that rubbish before?"
"Iknowyou have." When sheglared at him, headded,
"[t's not asif l'm plumbing the depths ofyour mind, dear
girl. That isthe burden of every tiefling. Some break under
it, some make it the millstone around their neck, some
revelinit."Hetilted his head again, scrutinizingher, with
PART 1 IRACESthat wicked glint inhis eyes."Youfight It, don'tyou? Like
alittle wildcat, Iwager. Every littlejab and commentjust
sharpensyour c1aws."
-Erin M. Evans, Brimstone Angels
Tobe greeted with stares and whispers, tosuffer
violence and insult onthe street, tosee mistrust and
fear ineveryeye:this isthe lotofthe tiefling.Andto
twist the knife, tieflings know that this isbecause a
pact struck generations agoinfused the essence of
Asmodeus-overlord ofthe Nine Hells-into their
bloodline. Their appearance and their nature are not
their fault but the result ofan ancient sin, forwhich
they and their children and their children's children
willalways be held accountable.
INFERNAL BLOODLINE
Tieflings are derived fram human bloodlines, and inthe
broadest possible sense, theystilllook humanoHowever,
their infernal heritage has leftaelear imprint on their
appearance. Tieflings have large horns that take any
ofavariety ofshapes: some havecurling horns like a
ram, others havestraight and tall horns like agazelle's,
and some spiral upward like an antelopes' horns. They
havethick tails, four totivefeet long,which lash orcoil
around their legswhen theygetupset or nervous. Their
canine teeth are sharply pointed, and their eyes are
solid colors-black, red, white, silver,or gold-with no
visibleselera or pupil.Their skin tones coverthe full
range ofhuman coloration, but also inelude various
shades ofred. Their hair, cascading down from behind
their horns, isusually dark, from blackor brown todark
red, blue,or purple.
SELF- RELIANT AND SUSPICIOUS
Tieflings subsist insmall minorities found mostly in
human cities or towns, often inthe roughest quarters
ofthose places, where theygrow uptobe swindlers,
thieves, or crime lords, Sometimes they live among
other minority populations in enclaves where they are
treated with more respect.
Lacking a homeland, tieftings know that they have
to make their own way in the world and that they have
to be strong to survive, They are not quick to trust
anyone who claims to be a friend. but when a tiefling's
companions demonstrate that they trust him or her,
the tiefting learns to extend the same trust to them,
And once a tiefting gives someone loyalty, the tiefting
is a firm friend or ally for life,
TIEFLING NAMES
Tiefting names fali into three broad categories. Tieftings
born into another culture typically have names reftective
of that culture. Some have names derived from the
Infernallanguage, passed down through generations,
that reftect their fiendish heritage. And some younger
tieftings. striving to find a place in the world, adopt a
na me that signifies a virtue or other concept and then
try to embody that concept. For some. the chosen na me
is a noble quest. For others. it's a grim destiny.
Male Infernal Names: Akmenos, Amnon, Barakas,
Damakos, Ekemon, lados, Kairon. Leucis, Melech.
Mordai, Morthos. Pelaios, Skamos. Therai
Female Infernal Names: Akta, Anakis, Bryseis, Criella.
Damaia. Ea. Kallista. Lerissa. Makaria. Nemeia,
Orianna. Phelaia. Rieta
"Virtue" Names: Art. Carrion, Chant, Creed, Despair,
Excellence, Fear, Glory, Hope, Ideal. Music. Nowhere.
Open, Poetry, Quest. Random. Reverence, Sorrow.
Temerily, Torment, WearyMUTUAL MISTRUST
Peopletend to be suspicious oftieflings.assuming that
their infernalheritage has leftits mark on their personality
and morality.not just their appearance. Shopkeepers keep
a close eyeon their goods when lieflingsenler lheir stores.
the lown walch mighl followa lieflingaround for a while.
and demagogues blame lieflingsfor slrange happenings.
The realily.lhough. is lhal a liefling'sbloodlinedoesn'l affecl
his or her personalilylo anygreal degree.Yearsof dealing
wilh mislrusl does leaveils mark on mosllieflings. and lhey
respond lo il in differenlways.Some choose lo Iiveup lo lhe
wickedslereolype. bul olhers are virluous. Mosl are simply
veryawareofhow people respond lo lhem. Aflerdealingwilh
lhis mislrusllhroughoul youlh. a lieflingoflen develops lhe
abililylo overcome prejudicelhrough charm or inlimidalion.
~ ~
TIEFLING TRAITS
Tieflings share cerlain racial traits as a result of their
infernal descent.
AbiJity Seore Inerease. Your lntelligence score
increases by 1,and your Charisma score increases by 2.
Age. Tieflings mature at the same rate as humans but
live a few years longer.
Alignment. Tieftings might not have an innate
tendency toward evil. but many of them end up there.
Evil or notoan independent nature inclines many
tieflings toward a chaotic alignment.
Size. Tieftings are about the same size and build as
humans. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks lOyour infernal heritage, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim Iight within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright 1ight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You
can't discern color in darkness. only shades of gray.
Hellish Resistance. You have resistance
to fire damage.
Infernal Legaey. You know the thaumatuqJy cantrip.
Once you reach 3rd levei, you can cast the hellish
rebuke spell once per day as a 2nd-levei spell. Once you
reach 5th levei, you can also cast the darkness spell
once per day. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for
these spclls.
Languages. You can speak. read. and write Common
and Infernal.
CHAPTER 3:CLASSES
OVENTURERS ARE EXTRAOROINARY PEOPLE,
driven bya thirst forexcitement into a
tifethat others would never dare lead,
They are herocs, compelled toexplore the
dark places oflhe world and take on lhe
challenges lhat lesser women and men
can't stand against.
Class is the primary dcfinition ofwhat your character
can do,!t's more than aprofession; it'syour character's
calling. Class shapes the wayyou think about the
world and intcract with itand your relationship with
other people and powers inthe multiverse. Afighler,
forexample, might view the world inpragmatic terms
ofstrategy and maneuvering, and see herself asjust a
pawn inamuch larger game. Acleric, bycontrast, might
see himself as awilling servanl inagod's unfolding plan
oraconflict brewing among various deities. While the
fighter has contacts inamercenary company or army,
the cleric might know anumber ofpriests, paladins, and
devotees who share his faith.Yourclass givesyou avariety ofspecial features, such
as afighter's mastery ofweapons and armor, and a
wizard's spells. Atlowleveis, your class gives you only
two or three features, but as you advance inleveiyou
gain more and your existing features often improve.
Each class enlry inthis chapter includes atable
summarizing the benefits you gaio at every levei,and
adetailed explanalion ofeach one.
Adventurers sometimes advance inmore thao one
class. Arogue might switch direction intifeand swear
the oath ofapaladin, Abarbarian might discover latent
magical abilily and dabble inthe sorcerer class while
continuing toadvance as abarbarian. Elves are known
tocombine martial mastery with magical training
and advance as fighters and wizards simultaneously.
Oplional rules forcombining classes inthis way,called
multiclassing, appear inchapter 6.
Twelveclasses-tisted inthe Classes table-are found
inalmost every D&Dworld and define lhe spectrum of
lypical adventurers.
1°'éFL:;;:A:S:SE:S==============================:::;=~"
dlO 51renglh or 5trenglh &
Dexterity Conslilulion
d8 Dexterity & 5trenglh &
Wisdom Dexlerily
dlO 51renglh & Wisdom&
Charisma Charisma
dlO Dexlerity & 51renglh &
Wisdom Dexlerity
d8 Dexlerily Dexlerily &
Intelligence
d6 Charisma Conslilulion
&Charisma
d8Charisma Wisdom&
Charisma
d6 Intelligence Intelligence
&Wisdomelass
Barbarian
Bard
Cleric
Druid
Fighter
Monk
Paladin
Ranger
Rogue
Sorcerer
WarlockDescriplion
Afierce warrior ofprimilive background
who can enter a battle rage
Aninspiring magician whose power
echoes the music ofcrealion
Apriestly champion who wields divine
magic inservice ofahigher power
Apriest ofthe Old Faith,wielding lhe
powers ofnalure-moonlight and
planl growlh, fire and lighlning-and
adopling animal forms
Amasler ofmarlial combal, skilled wilh
avariely ofweapons and armor
Anmasler ofmarlial arls, harnessing
lhe power oflhe body inpursuil of
physical and spirilual perfeclion
Aholywarrior bound lo asacred oalh
Awarrior who uses marlial prowess and
nalure magic lo combal Ihreals on lhe
edges ofcivilizalion
Ascoundrel who uses sleallh and
Irickery to overcome obslacles and
enemies
Aspellcasler who draws on inherenl
magic from agifl or bloodline
Awielder of magic Ihal isderived from
a bargain wilh an eXlraplanar enlily
Ascholarly magic-user capable of
manipulaling lhe slruclures ofrealilyHil
Die
d12
d8
d8
d8Primary
Abilily
51renglh
Charisma
Wisdom
WisdomSaving Throw
Proficiencies
5trenglh &
Conslitulion
Dexlerily &
Charisma
Wisdom &
Charisma
Inlelligence
&WisdomArmor and Weapon
Proficiencies
Lightand medium armor, shields,
simple and marlial weapons
Lighlarmor, simple weapons, hand
crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
shortswords
Lighland medium armor, shields,
simple weapons
Lighland medium armor (nonmelal),
shields (nonmet.;I), clubs, daggers,
darls, javelins, maces, quarlerslaffs,
scimilars, sickles, slings, spears
Aliarmor, shields, simple and marlial
weapons
5imple weapons, shorlswords
Aliarmor, shields, simple and marlial
weapons
Lighland medium armor, shields,
simple and marlial weapons
Lightarmor, simpieweapons, hand
crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
shorlswords
Daggers, darls, slings, quarlerstaffs,
lighl crossbows
Lighlarmor, simple weapons
Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs,
light crossbows
~5
PART 1ICLASSESBARBARIAN
Atall human tribesman strides through ablizzard,
draped infur and hefting his axe. Helaughs as he
charges toward the frost giant who dared poach his
people's elkherdo
Ahalf-orc snarls at the latest challenger toher
authority overtheir savage tribe, ready tobreak his neck
with her bare hands as she did tothe last six rivaIs.
Frothing at the mouth, adwarf slams his helmet into
the face ofhis drow foe,then turns todrive his armored
elbow into the gut ofanother.
These barbarians, different as they might be, are
defined bytheir rage: unbridled, unquenchable, and
unthinking fury. More than amere emotion, their anger
isthe ferocity ofacornered predator, the unrelenting
assault ofastorm, the churning turmoil ofthe sea.
For some, their rage springs from acommunion
with fierce animal spirits. Others draw from aroiling
reservoir ofanger at aworld fullofpain. For every
barbarian, rage isapower that fuels notjust abattle
frenzy but also uncanny reflexes, resilience, and
feats ofstrength.
PRIMALINSTINCT
People oftowns and cities take pride inhow their
civilized ways set them apart from animaIs, as if
denying one's own nature was amark ofsuperiority. To
abarbarian, though, civilization isnovirtue, but asign
ofweakness. The strong embrace their animal nature-
keen instincts, primaI physicality, and ferocious rage.
Barbarians are uncomfortable when hedged inbywalls
and crowds. They thrive inthe wilds oftheir homelands:
the tundra, jungle, or grasslands where their tribes
liveand hunt.
Barbarians come alive inthe chaos ofcombat.
They can enter aberserk state where rage takes over,
giving them superhuman strength and resilience. A
barbarian can draw on this reservoir offury onlyafew
times without resting, but those fewrages are usually
sufficient todefeat whatever threats arise.
ALIFEOF DANGER
Notevery member ofthe tribes deemed "barbarians"
byscions ofcivilized society has the barbarian c1ass.A
true barbarian among these people isas uncommon as
askilled fighter inatown. and he orshe plays asimilar
role as aprotector ofthe people and aleader intimes
ofwar. Lifeinthe wild places ofthe world isfraught
with peril: rival tribes, deadly weather, and terrifying
CREATING A BARBARIANQUICK BUILD
Voucan make a barbarian quickly byfollowing these
suggestions. First, put your highest ability score in
Strength, followed byConstitution. Second, choose the
outlander background.
HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: ld12 per barbarian levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 12 +your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ld12 (or 7) +your
Constitution modifier per barbarian leveIafter 1stAs a barbarian, you gain the following class features.CLASS FEATURES
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills: Choose two from Animal Handling, Athletics,
Intimidation, Nature, Perception, and SurvivalWhat led you to take up the adventuring life?Were you
lured tosettled lands bythe promise ofriches? Didyou
join forces with soldiers ofthose lands to face a shared
threat? Did monsters or an invading horde drive you
out ofyour homeland, making you a rootless refugee?
Perhaps you were a prisoner ofwar, brought in chains to
"civilized" lands and only now able towin your freedom.
Or you might have been cast out from your people
because ofa crime you committed, a taboo you violated,
or a coup that removed you from a position ofauthority.THEBARBARIAN
Proficieney Rage
Levei Bonus Features Rages Damage
1st +2Rage, Unarmored 2 +2
Defense
2nd +2 Reekless Attaek, 2 +2
Danger Sense
3rd +2 Primai Path 3 +2
4th +2 Ability Score 3 +2
Improvement
5th +3 Extra Attaek, 3 +2
Fast Movement
6th +3 Path feature 4 +2
7th +3 Ferallnstinet 4 +2
8th +3 Ability Seore 4 +2
Improvement
9th +4Brutal Criticai 4 +3
(1 die)
10th +4 Path feature 4 +3
11th +4Relentless Rage 4 +3
12th +4 Ability Score 5 +3
Improvement
13th +5 Brutal Criticai 5 +3
(2 dice)
14th +5 Path feature 5 +3
15th +5 Persistent Rage 5 +3
16th +5 Ability Seore 5 +4
Improvement
17th +6Brutal Criticai 6
(3 dice)
18th +6Indomitable 6
Might
19th +6 Ability Score 6
Improvement
20th +6 Primai Champion Unlimited
monsters. Barbarians charge headlong into that danger
so that their people don't have to.
Their courage in the face ofdanger makes barbarians
perfectly suited for adventuring. Wandering isoften a
way oflife fortheir native tribes, and the rootless lifeof
the adventurer is little hardship for a barbarian. Some
barbarians miss the close-knit family structures ofthe
tribe, but eventually find them replaced bythe bonds
formed among the members oftheir adventuring parties.
When creating a barbarian character, think about where
your character comes from and his or her place in the
world. Talk with your DMabout an appropriate origin
foryour barbarian. Didyou come from a distant land,
making you a stranger in the area ofthe campaign?
Or is the campaign set in a rough-and-tumble frontier
where barbarians are common?
PART 1 CL"" I::
EQUIPMENT
Youstart with the following equipment, inaddition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)agreataxe or (b)anymartial melee weapon
(a)two handaxes or (b)anysimple weapon
Anexpiorer's pack and fourjavelins
RAGE
Inbattle, you fightwith primai ferocity. Onyour turn,
you can enter arage as abonus action.
While raging, you gain the following benefits ifyou
aren't wearing heavy armor:
Vouhave advantage on Strength checks and Strength
saving throws.
When you make amelee weapon attack using
Strcngth, you gain abonus tothe damage rollthat
increases as you gain leveis as abarbarian, as shown
inthe Rage Damage column ofthe Barbarian table.
Youhave resistance tobludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing damage.
Ifyou are able tocast spells, you ean't cast them or
concentrate on tbem while raging.
Yourrage lasts for 1minute. ltends early ifyouare
knocked unconscious or ifyour turn ends and you
haven't attacked ahostile creature since your last turn
or taken damage since then. Voucan also end your rage
onyour turn as abonus action.
Once you have raged the number oftimes shown
foryour barbarian leveIinthe Rages column ofthe
Barbarian table, you must finish along rest before you
can rage again.
PART 1ICLASSESUNARMORED DEFENSE
While you are not wearing any armor, your Armor Class
equals 10+your Dexterity modifier +your Constitution
modifier. Voucan use ashield and still gain this benefit.
RECKLESS ATTACK
Starting at 2nd levei,you can throw aside ali concern
fordefense toattack with fierce desperation. When
you make your first attack onyour turn, you can decide
toattack recklessly. Doing so givesyou advantage on
melee weapon attack rolls using Strength during this
turn, but attack rolls against you have advantage until
your next turno
DANGER SENSE
At2nd levei,you gain an uncanny sense ofwhen things
nearby aren't as they should be, givingyou an edge
when you dodge away from danger.
Vouhave advantage on Dexterity saving throws
against effects that you can see, suehas traps and spells.
Togain this benefit, you can't be blinded, deafened, or
incapacitated.
PRIMAL PATH
At3rd levei.you choose apath that shapes the nature of
your rage. Choose the Path ofthe Berserker or the Path
ofthe Totem Warrior, both detailed atthe end ofthe
c1assdescription. Yourchoice grants you features at 3rd
leveiand agaln at6th, 10th, and 14thleveis.
ABILITY SCORE IMPRovEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei,you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by2,oryoucan increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th levei,you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action onyour turno
FAST MOVEMENT
Starting at 5th levei,your speed increases by 10feet
while you aren't wearing heavy armor.
FERAL INSTINCT
By7th levei,your instincts are so honed that you have
advantage on initiative rolls.
Additionally, ifyou are surprised at the beginning of
combat and aren't incapacitated. you can act normally
onyour first turn, but onlyifyou enler your rage before
doing anything else on that turno
BRUTAL CRITICAL
Beginning at 9th levei,you can rollone additional
weapon damage die when determining the extra
damage foracriticai hitwith amelee attack.
This increases totwo additional dice at 13th levei
and three additional dice at 17thleveI.
RELENTLESS RAGE
Starting at 11th levei,your rage can keep you fighting
despite grievous wounds. lfyou drop to Ohit points
while you're raging and don't die outright, you can make
aDC 10Constitution saving throw. lfyou succeed. you
drop to 1hit point inslead.
Each time you use this feature after the first. the DC
increases by5.When you finish ashort or long rest, the
DCresets to 10.
PERSISTENT RAGE
Beginning at 15th levei,your rage isso fierce that
ilends early onlyifyou faliunconscious or ifyou
choose toend il.
INDOMITABLE MIGHT
Beginning at 18th levei,ifyour total foraStrength
check isless than your Strength score, you can use that
score inplace ofthe total.
PRIMAL CHAMPION
At20th levei.you embody the power ofthe wilds. Vour
Strength and Constitution scores increase by4.Vour
maximum forthose scores isnow 24.
PRIMAL PATHS
Rage burns inevery barbarian's heart. afurnace
that drives him or her toward greatness. Differentbarbarians attribute their rage todifferent sources,
however. For some, itisan internai reservoir where
pain. grief. and anger are forged into afury hard as
steel. Others see itas aspiritual blessing. agiftof
atotem animal.
PATH OFTHE BERSERKER
For some barbarians. rage isameans toan end-that
end being violence. The Path ofthe Berserker isapath
ofuntrammeled fury,slick with blood. Asyou enter
the berserker's rage. you thrill inthe chaos ofbattle,
heedless ofyour own health orwell-being.
FRENZY
Starting when you choose this path at 3rd levei.you
can goinlo afrenzy when you rage. lfyou doso. for
the duration ofyour rage you can make asingle melee
weapon attack as abonus action on each ofyour turns
after this one. When your rage ends. you suffer one levei
ofexhaustion (as described inappendix A).
MINDLESS RAGE
Beginning at 6th levei.you can't becharmed or
frightened while raging. lfyou are charmed or
frightened when you enter your rage. the effect is
suspended forthe duration ofthe rage.
INTIMIDATING PRESENCE
Beginning at 10th levei,you can use your action to
frighten someone with your menacing presence.
When you do so. choose one creature that you can see
within 30 feet of YOU.lfthe creature can see or hear
YOU.itmust succeed onaWisdom saving throw (DC
equal to8 +your proficiency bonus +your Charisma
modifier) or be frightened ofyou until the end ofyour
next turnoOn subsequent turns, you can use your action
toextend the duration ofthis effect on the frightened
A"RT J ('L SE
creature IIntil the end ofyour next turno This effeet ends
if the creatllre ends its turn out of line of sight or more
than 60 feet away from YOU.
If the creature succeeds on its saving throw. you can't
use this feature on that ereature again for 24 hours.
RETALIATION
Starting at 14th levei, when you take damage from
a creature that is within 5 fcet ofYOII. you can usc
your reaction to make a melee weapon attack against
that creature.
PATH OFTHE TOTEM WARRIOR
The Path of the Totem Warrior is a spiritual journcy, as
the harharian accepts a spirit animal as guide, protcctor,
and inspiration. In battle. your totem spirit fills you
with supernatural might. adding magiral fuel to your
barharian rage.
Most harharian tribes consider a totem animal to bc
kin to a particular elan. [n such cases. it is unusual for
an individual to have more than one totem animal spirit,
though exceptions exisl.
SPIRIT SEEKER
Yours is a path that seeks altunement with the natural
world. giving you a kinship with beasts. At 3rd levei when
you adopt this path. you gain the ability to east the bcast
senseandspeak with animaIs spells. but only as rituais,
as deseribcd in ehapter 10.
TOTEM SPIRIT
AI 3rd leveI. when you adopt this path, you choose a
totem spirit and gain its feature. Voumust make or
acquire a physiral totem ohject-an amulet or similar
adornment-that incorporates fur or feathers. c1aws.
teeth, or bones of the totem animal. AIyour option, you
also gain minar physical altributes that are reminiscent
ofyour totem spiril. For example. ifyou have a bear
totem spirit. yott might be unusually hairy and thick.
skinned, or ifyour totem is the eagle. your eyes turn
bright yellow.Your totem animal might be an animal related to those
listed here but more appropriate to your homeland.
For example. you could choose a hawk or vulture in
place of an eagle.
Bear.While raging. you have resistance to ali damage
except psychic damage. The spirit of the bear makes you
tough enough to stand up to any punishment.
Eagle.While you're raging and aren't wearing
heavy armor. other creatures have disadvantage on
opportunity attack rolls against YOU. and you can use the
Dash action as a bonus action on your turno The spirit
of the eagle makes you into a predator who can weave
through the fray with ease.
Wolf.While you're raging. your friends have
advantage on melee attack rolls against any creature
within 5 fect ofyou that is hostile to YOU. The spirit of
lhe wolf makes you a leader of hunters.
ASPECT OF THE BEAST
At 6th leveI.you gain a magical benefit based on the
totem animal ofyour choice. You can choose the same
animal you selected at 3rd levei or a different one.
Bepr.Yougain the might of a bear. Your carrying
capacity (including maximum load and maximum lift)
is doubled, and you have advantage 00Strength checks
made to push, pull. lift, or break ohjects.
Eagle.Yougain the eyesight of an eagle. You can
see up to 1 mile away with no difficulty. able to discern
even fine details as though looking at something no
more than 100 feet away from you. Additionally, dim
light doesn't impose disadvantage on your Wisdom
(Perception) checks.
Wolf.You gain the hunting sensibilities of a wolf. You
can track other creatures while traveling at a fast pace,
and you can move stealthily while traveling at a normal
pace (see ,hapter 8 for rules on travei pace).
SPIRIT WALKER
At 10th leveI.you can cast the com mune with nature
spell, but only as a ritual. When you do so, a spiritual
version of one of the animais you ehose for Totem Spirit
or Aspect of the Beast appears to you to convey the
information you seek.
TOTEMIC ATTUNEMENT
AI 14th levei, you gain a magical benefit based on a
totem animal ofyour choice. Vou can ehoose the same
animal you selected previously or a different one.
Bear.While you're raging. any creature within 5 feet
ofyou that's hostile to you has disadvantage on altaek
rolls against targets other than you or another eharaeter
with this feature. An enemy is immune to this effeet if it
can't see or hear you or if it ean't be frightened.
Eagle.While raging. you have a flying speed equal to
your current walking speed. This benefit works only in
short bursts; you fali ifyou end your turn in the air and
nothing else is holding you aloft.
Wolf.While you're raging, you ean use a honus aetion
on your turn to knoek a Large or smaller ereature prone
when you hit it with melee weapon attack.
5°PART IICLASSES
BARD
Humming as she traces her fingers over an ancient
monument inalong-forgotten ruin, ahalf-elf inrugged
leathers finds knowledge springing into her mind,
conjured forth bythe magic ofher song-knowledge
ofthe people who constructed the monument and the
mythic saga itdepicts.
Astern human warrior bangs his sword rhythmically
against his scale mai!,setting the tempo forhiswar chant
and exhorting his companions tobravery and heroismo
The magic ofhis song fortifies and emboldens them.
Laughing as she tunes her cittern, agnome weaves
her subtle magic over the assembled nobles, ensuring
that her companions' words will bewell received.
Whether scholar, skald, ar scoundrel, abard weaves
magic through words and music toinspire allies,
demoralize foes, manipulate minds, create
illusions, and even heal wounds.
MUSIC AND MAGIC
In the worlds of0&0, words and music are
notjust vibrations ofair, but vocalizations with
power ali their own. The bard isamaster ofsong,
speech, and the magic they contain. Bards say
that the multiverse was spoken into existence, that the
words ofthe gods gave itshape, and that echoes ofthese
primordial Words ofCreation still resound throughout
the cosmos. The music ofbards isan attempt tosnatch
and harness those echoes, subtly woven into their
spells and powers.
The greatest strength ofbards istheir sheer
versatility. Many bards prefer tostick tothe sidelines
incombat, using their magic toinspire their allies and
hinder their foes fram adistance. Butbards are capable
ofdefending themselves inmelee ifnecessary, using
their magic tobolster their swords and armar. Their
spells lean toward charms and illusions rather than
blatantly destructive spells. They have awide-ranging
knowledge ofmany subjects and anatural aptitude
that lets them do almost anything well. Bards become
masters ofthe talents they set their minds toperfecting,
from musical performance toesoteric knowledge.
LEARNING FROM EXPERIENCE
True bards are notcommon inthe world. Notevery
minstrel singing inatavern arjester cavorting inaroyal
court isabardoOiscovering the magic hidden inmusic
requires hard study and some measure ofnatural talent
that most traubadours andjongleurs lack. ltcan behard
tospot the difference between these performers and true
bards, though. Abard's lifeisspent wandering acrass
the land gathering lore, telling stories, and livingon the
gratitude ofaudiences, much likeany other entertainer.
But adepth ofknowledge, aleveIofmusical skill, and a
touch ofmagic set bards apart fram their fellows.
Only rarely dobards settle inone place forlong, and
their natural desire totraveI-to findnew tales totell,
new skills tolearn, and new discoveries beyond the
horizon-makes an adventuring career anatural calling.
Every adventure isan opportunity tolearn, practice a
variety ofskills, enter long-forgotten tombs, discover lost
P~RT I Cl:'\SSES
52works ofmagic, decipher oldtomes, traveI tostrange
places, or encounter exotic creatures. Bards loveto
accompany heroes towitness their deeds firsthand. A
bard who can tellan awe-inspiring story from personal
experience earns renown among other bards. Indeed,
after telling so many stories about heroes accomplishing
mighty deeds, many bards take these themes toheart
and assume heroic roles themselves.
CREATING A BARD
Bards thrive on stories, whether those stories are true
or not. Yourcharacter's background and motivations
are not as important as the stories that heor she tells
about them. Perhaps you had asecure and mundane
childhood. There's nogood story tobetold about that,
soyou might paint yourself as an orphan raised byahag
inadismal swamp. ar your childhood might beworthy
ofastory. Some bards acquire their magical music
through extraordinary means, including the inspiration
offeyor other supernatural creatures.
Didyou serve an apprenticeship, studying under a
master, following the more experienced bard until you
were ready tostrike out onyour own? ar didyou attend
acollege where you studied bardic lore and practiced
your musical magic? Perhaps you were ayoung runaway
or orphan, befriended byawandering bard who became
your mentor. ar you might have been aspoiled noble
child tutored byamaster. Perhaps you stumbled into the
clutches ofahag, making abargain foramusical giftin
addition toyour lifeand freedom, butat what cost?
PART I ICLASSES•
QUICK BUILD
Youcan make abard quickly by
following these suggestions. First,
Charisma should beyour highest
ability score, followed byDexterity.
Second, choose the entertainer
background. Third, choose the dancing Jights and
vicious mockery cantrips, along with the following
1st-leveIspells: charm person, detect magic, heaJing
word,andthunderwave.
CLASS FEATURES
Asabard, you gain the following class features.
HIT POlNTS
Hit Dice: Id8 per bard levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 8 +your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: Id8 (or5) +your
Constitution modifier per bard leveIafter 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Light armor
Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
longswords, rapiers, shortswords
Tools: Three musical instruments ofyour choice
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma
Skills: Choose any three
EQUlPMENT
Youstart with the following equipment, inaddition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)arapier, (b)alongsword, or(c)anysimple weapon
(a)adiplomat's pack or (b)an entertainer's pack
(a)alute or (b)any other musical instrument
Leather armor and adagger
SPELLCASTING
Vouhave learned tountangle and reshape the fabric of
reality inharmony with your wishes and musicoYour
spells are part ofyour vast repertoire, magic that you
can tune todifferent situations. See chapter 10forthe
general rules ofspellcasting and chapter li forthe
bard spelllist.
CANTRIPS
Vouknow two cantrips ofyour choice from the bard
spelllist. Voulearn additional bard cantrips ofyour
choice at higher leveIs,as shown inthe Cantrips Known
column ofthe Bard table.
Proficiency Cantrips Spells-Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Levei Bonus Features Known Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th6th7th 8th 9th
1st +2 Spellcasting, Bardic Inspiration (d6) 2 4 2
2nd +2 Jaek of Ali Trades, Song of Rest (d6) 2 5 3
3rd +2 Bard College, Expertise 2 6 4 2
4th +2Ability Score Improvement 3 7 4 3
5th +3 Bardic Inspiration (d8), 3 8 432
Font of Inspiration
6th +3 Countercharm, Bard College feature 3 9 4 3 3
7th +3 3 10 4 3 3 1
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 3 11 4 3 3 2
9th +4 Song of Rest (d8) 3 1243 3 3 1
10th +4 Bardic Inspiration (dl0), Expertise, 4 14 4 3 3 3 2
Magical Secrets
11th +4 4 15 4 3 3 3 2
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 15 433 3 2
13th +5 Song of Rest (d10) 4 16 4 3 3 3 2
14th +5 MagicalSecrets, 4 18 4 3 3 3 2
Bard College feature
15th +5 Bardic Inspiration (d12) 4 19 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4 19 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
17th +6 Song of Rest (d12) 4 20 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
18th +6 MagicalSecrets 422 4 3 3 3 3 1 1
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4 22 4 3 3 3 3 2 1
20th +6 Superior Inspiration 4 22 4 3 3 3 3 2 2
SPELL SLOTS
The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have to
cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. Tocast one of
these spells. you must expend a slot of the spell's levei
ar higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long resl.
For example. ifyou know the 1st-levei spell cure
woundsand have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-levei spell slot
available, you ean cast cure wounds using either slol.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HIGHER
Vou know four 1st-levei spells ofyour choice from the
bard spelllist.
The Spells Known column ofthe Bard table shows
when you learn more bard spells ofyour choice. Each of
these spells must be ofa levei for which you have spell
slots, as shown on the table. For instance, when you
reach 3rd leveI in this c1ass, you can learn one new spell
of 1st ar 2nd leveI.
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass, you
can choose one ofthe bard spells you know and replace
ilwilh anolher spell from the bard spelllist, which also
must be ofa levei for which you have spell slots.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Charisma isyour spellcasting ability foryour bard
spells. Your magic comes from the heart and soul you
pau r into the performance ofyour music ar oration.
Vouuse your Charisma whenever a spell refers toyour
spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your Charismamodifier when setting the saving throw DC for a bard
spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
Spell attack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
RITUAL CASTING
Voucan cast any bard spell you know as a ritual ifthat
spell has the ritual tag.
SPELLCASTING Focus
Voucan use a musical instrument (found in chapter 5)
as a spellcasting focus foryour bard spells.
BARDIC INSPIRATION
Voucan inspire others through stirring words or musico
Todo so, you use a bonus action on your turn to choose
one creature other than yourselfwithin 60 feet ofyou
who can hear YOU.That creature gains one Bardic
lnspiration die, a d6.
Once within the next 10minutes, lhe crealure can roll
the die and add the number rolled to one ability check,
attack roll, ar saving throw itmakes. The creature can
wait until after it rolls lhe d20 before deciding to use the
Bardic Inspiration die, but must decide hefore the DM
says whether the roll succeeds ar fails. Once the Bardic
Inspiration die is rolled. it is losl. Acreature can have
only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time.
PARl I I Cl-\SSES53
5+Voucan use this feature anumber oftimes equal
toyour Charisma modifier (aminimum ofonce). Vou
regain anyexpended uses when you finish along rest.
YourBardic Inspiration die changes when you reach
certain leveis inthis class. The die becomes ad8 at 5th
levei,adlO at 10th levei,and ad12 at 15th leveI.
jACKOFALL TRADES
Starting at 2nd levei,you can add halfyour proficiency
bonus, rounded down, toany ability check you make that
doesn't already include your proficiency bonus.
SONG OF REST
Beginning at 2nd levei,you can use soothing music or
oration tohelp revitalize your wounded allies during
ashort rest. Ifyou or any friendly creatures who can
hear your performance regain hit points atthe end Df
the short rest, each ofthose creatures regains an extra
Id6 hitpoints.
The extra hit points increase when you reach certain
leveis inthis class: to ld8 at9th levei,to Idl0 at 13th
levei,and to Idl2 at 17thleveI.
BARD COLLEGE
At3rd levei,you delve into the advanced techniques Df
abard college Dfyour choice: the College ofLore or the
College ofValor,both detailed atthe end ofthe class
description. Yourchoice grants you features at 3rd levei
and again at6th and 14thleveI.
EXPERTISE
At3rd leveI,choose two ofyour skill proficiencies. Your
proficiency bonus isdoubled foranyability check you
make that uses either ofthe chosen proficiencies.
At 10th leveI,you can choose another two skill
proficiencies togain this benefit.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei,you can increase one ability score Dfyour
choice by2,oryou can increase two ability scores Df
your choice by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
FONT OF INSPIRATION
Beginning when you reach 5th leveI,you regain aliof
your expended uses ofBardic Inspiration when you
finish ashort or long rest.
COUNTERCHARM
At6th levei,you gain the ability touse musica!notes or
words ofpower todisrupt mind-influencing effects. As
ao actioo, you can slaft a perfonnance that lasts until
the end ofyour nextturn. During that time, you and any
friendly creatures within 30 feet ofyou have advantage
on saving throws against being frightened or charmed.
Acreature must beable tohear you togain this benefit.
The performance ends early ifyou are incapacitated or
silellced or ifyou voluntarily end it(noaction required).
PART I ICLASSESMAGICAL SECRETS
By10th leveI,you have plundered magical knowledge
from awide spectrum ofdisciplines. Choose two spells
from any class, including this one. Aspell you choose
must beDfaleveiyou can cast, as shown on the Bard
table, or acantrip.
The chosen spells count as bard spells foryou and are
included inthe number inthe Spells Known column Df
the Bard table.
Voulearn two additional spells from anyclass at 14th
leveIand again at 18th leveI.
SUPERIOR INSPIRATION
At20th levei,when you roll initiative and have no uses
DfBardic Inspiration left,you regain one use.
BARDCOLLEGES
The way Dfabard isgregarious. Bards seek each
other out toswap songs and stories, boast oftheir
accomplishments, and share their knowledge. Bards
form loose associations, which they call colleges, to
facilitate their gatherings and preserve their traditions.
COLLEGE OF LORE
Bards Dfthe College ofLore know something about
most things, collecting bits Dfknowledge from sources
as diverse as scholarly tomes and peasant tales.
Whether singing folkballads intaverns or elaborate
compositions inroyal courts, these bards use their gifts
tohold audiences spellbound. When the applause dies
down, the audience members might findthemselves
questioning everything they held tobe true, from their
faith inthe priesthood ofthe localtemple totheir
loyalty tothe king.
The loyaltyDfthese bards Iiesinthe pursuit Dfbeauty
and truth, notin fealty toamonarch or following the
tenets ofadeity.Anoble who keeps such abard as a
herald or advisor knows that the bard would rather be
honest than politic.
The college's members gather inlibraries and
sometimes inactual colleges, complete with classrooms
and dormitories, toshare their lore with one another.
They also meet at festivaIs oraffairs ofstate, where they
can expose corruption, unravellies, and poke fun atself-
important figures ofauthority.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES
When youjoin the College ofLore at 3rd levei,you gain
proficiency with three skills ofyour choice.
CUTTING WORDS
AIsoat3rd levei,you learn how touse your witto
distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and
competence ofothers. When acreatare that you can
see within 60 feetofyou makes an atlack roll,an ability
check, or adamage roll,you can use your reaction to
expend one Dfyour uses ofBardic Inspiration, rolling
a Bardic Inspiration die and subtracting the number
rolled from the creature's roll.Voucan choose touse
this feature after the creature makes itsroll,but before
the DMdetermines whether the atlack rollorability
check succeeds or fails, or befure the creature deals its
damage. The creature is imlllune if it can't hear you or if
it's imlllune tu being charmed.
ADDITIONAL MAGICAL SECRETS
At 6th leveI,yuu learn twu spells ofyuur chuice from any
class. Aspell yuu choose must be of a levei you call cast,
as shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip. The chosen
spells CUUlltas bard spells for yuu but don't count
against the number of bard spells you know.
PEERLESS SKILL
Starting at 14th leveI, when you IlIake an ability check.
you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration. RolI a
Bardic lllspiration die and add the numbcr rolled to
your ability check. You call choose to do so after rou roll
the die for the ability check, but before the DM tells rou
whether yuu succeed ur fai!'
COLLEGE OF VALOR
Bards of the Cullege uf Valor are daring skalds whosc
tales keep alive the Illemury uf the great heroes of the
past, and thereby inspire a new generatioll of heroes.
These bards gather in mead halls or around great
bonfires to sing the deeds of the mighty, both past
and present. They traveI the land to witness great
events firsthand and tu ensure that the melllory of
those events doesn't pass frolO the world. With theirsongs, they inspire others to reach the same heights of
accomplishment as the heroes of old.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES
When you join the College of Valor at 3rd levei, you
gain proficiency with medium armor, shields, and
martial weapuns.
COMBAT INSPIRATION
AIso at 3rd leveI,rou learn to inspire others in battle.
Acrcature that has a Bardic lnspiratiun die from you
can roll that die and add the nUlllber rolled to a weapon
damage roll itjusl nlade. Altematively. when an attack
roll is made against the ercature, it can use its reaetion
to roll the Bardie Inspiration die and add the numbcr
rolled to its AC against that attaek. after seeing the roll
but before knowing whelher it hits or misses.
EXTRA ATTACK
Starting at 6th leveI,you can attack twice, instead of
onee, whcnever rou take the Atlaek aetion on your tum.
BATTLE MAGIC
At 14th level, you have rnastered the art of weaving
spellcasting and weapon use into a single harmonious
act. When yuu use your action to cast a bard spell, you
can ll1ake Qne weapon attackas abonusactiol1.
PART 1 C.LASSF.S
55
PART 1 ICLASSESCLERIC
Arms and eyes upraised toward the sun and a prayer
on his lips, an elf begins to glow with an inner light that
spills out to heal his battle-worn companions.
Chanting a song ofglory, a dwarf swings his axe
in wide swaths to cut through the ranks oforcs
arrayed against him, shouting praise to the gods with
every foe's falI.
Calling down a curse upon the forces ofundeath, a
human lifts her holy symbol as light pours from itto
drive back the zombies crowding in on her companions.
Clerics are intermediaries between the mortal world
and the distant planes ofthe gods. As varied as the gods
they serve, clerics strive to embody the handiwork of
their deities. No ordinary priest, a cleric is imbued with
divine magic.
HEALERS AND WARRIORS
Divine magic, as the name suggests, is the power of
the gods, lIowing from them into the world. Clerics are
conduits for that power, manifesting itas miraculous
effects. The gods don't grant this power to everyone who
seeks it, but only to those chosen to fuIfi11a high calling.
Harnessing divine magic doesn't rely on study or
training. Acleric might learn formulaic prayers and
ancient rites, but the ability to cast cleric spells relies on
devotion and an intuitive sense ofa deity's wishes.
Clerics combine the helpful magic ofhealing and
inspiring their allies with spells that harm and hinder
foes. They can provoke awe and dread, lay curses of
plague or poison, and even call down liames from heaven
to consume their enemies. For those evildoers who will
benefit most from a mace to the head, clerics depend on
their combat training to let them wade into melee with
the power ofthe gods on their side.
DIVINE AGENTS
Not every acolyte or officiant at a tempIeor shrine is a
cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life oftemple
service, carrying out their gods' will through prayer and
sacrifice, not by magic and strength ofarms. In some
cities, priesthood amounts to a political office, viewed
as a stepping stone to higher positions ofauthority and
involving no communion with a god at alI. True clerics
are rare in most hierarchies.
When a cleric takes up an adventuring life, itis usually
because his or her god demands it. Pursuing the goals
ofthe gods often involves braving dangers beyond the
walls ofcivilization, smiting evil or seeking holy relics in
ancient tombs. Many clerics are also expected to protect
3rd +2 3 4 2
4th +2 Ability Seore Improvement 4 4 3
5th +3 Destroy Undead (CR 1/2) 4 4 3 2
6th +3 Channel Divinity (2/rest), 4 4 3 3
Divine Domain feature
7th +3 4 4 3 3 1
8th +3 Ability Seore Improvement, Destroy Undead 4 4 3 3 2
(CR 1), Divine Domain feature
9th +4 4 4 3 3 3 1
10th +4 Divine Intervention 543 3 3 2
11th +4 Destroy Undead (CR 2) 543 3 3 2
12th +4 Ability Seore Improvement 5 4 3 3 3 2
13th +5 5433 3 2
14th +5Destroy Undead (CR 3) 5 4 3 3 3 2
15th +5 54 3 3 3 2
16th +5 Ability Seore Improvement 54 3 3 3 2
17th +6 Destroy Undead (CR 4), 54 3 3 3 2
Divine Domain feature
18th +6 Channel Divinity (3/rest) 54 3 3 3 3 11
19th +6 Ability Seore Improvement 54 3 3 3 3 2 1
20th +6 Divine Intervention improvement 5433 3 3 2 2THE CLERIC
Levei
1st
2ndProficieney
Bonus
+2
+2Features
Spellcasting, Divine Domain
Channel Divinity (l/rest),
Divine Domain featureCantrips
Known
3
31st
2
3-Spell Slots per Spell Level-
2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
their deities' worshipers, which ean mean fighting
rampaging ores, negotiating peaee between warring
nations, or sealing a portal that would allow a demon
prinee to enter the world.
Most adventuring clerics maintain some eonneetion to
established temples and orders oftheir faiths. Atemple
might ask for aclerie's aid, or a high priest might be in a
position to demand il.
CREATING A CLERIC
Asyou ereate a clerie, the most important question to
eonsider is whieh deity toserve and what principies you
want your eharaeter to embody, Appendix Bincludes
Iists ofmany ofthe gods ofthe multiverse, Cheek with
your DMto learn whieh deities are inyour eampaign.
Onee you've ehosen a deity, eonsider your cleric's
relationship to that god, Didyou enter this servicc
willingly? ar did the god ehoose you, impelling you into
service with no regard foryour wishes? How do the
tempie priests ofyour faith regard you: as a ehampion
or a troublemaker? What are your ultimate goals? Does
your deity have a special task in mind foryou? ar are
you striving to prove yourself worthy ofa great quest?
QUICK BUILD
Vouean make a cleric quiekly byfollowing these
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest
ability seore, followed byStrength or Constitution.
Seeond, ehoose the aeolyte baekground.CLASS FEATURES
As a clerie, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d8per clerie levei
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 8 +your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: 1d8(or 5) +your
Constitution modifier per clerie levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Alisimple weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from History, lnsight, Medicine,
Persuasion, and Religion
EQ.UIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted byyour baekground:
(a)a mace or (b)a warhammer (ifproficient)
(a)seale mai!, (b)leather armor, or (c)eha;n mai! (if
proficient)
(a)a light erossbow and 20 bolts or (b)any simple
weapon
(a)a priest's paek or (b)an explorer's paek
Ashield and a holysymbol
Po\RT 1 CL'\ SES5i
58SPELLCASTING
As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric spells.
See chapter 10for the general rules ofspellcasting and
chapter 11for the cleric spelllist.
CANTRIPS
At 1st levei,you know three cantrips ofyour choice from
the cleric spelllist. Voulearn additional cleric cantrips
ofyour choice at higher leveis, as shown in the Cantrips
Known column ofthe Cleric table.
PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS
The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. Tocast one of
these spells, you must expend a slot ofthe spell's levei
or higher. Vouregain all expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
Vouprepare the list ofcleric spells that are available
foryou to cast, choosing from the cleric spelllist. When
you do 50,choose a number ofcleric spells equal to
your Wisdom modifier +your cleric levei(minimum of
one spell). The spells must be ofa leveIforwhich you
have spell slots.
For example, ifyou are a 3rd-Ievel c1eric,you have four
1st-levei and two 2nd-levei spell slots. With a Wisdom
of 16,your list ofprepared spells can include six spells
of 1st or 2nd levei, in any combination. ]fyou prepare
the 1st-levei spell cure wounds, you can cast it using
a 1st-levei or 2nd-levei slot. Casting the spell doesn't
remove itfrom your list of prepared spells.
PART 1ICLASSESVoucan change your list ofprepared spells when you
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list ofcleric spells
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1
minute per spelllevel for each spell on your listo
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Wisdom isyour spellcasting ability foryour cleric spells.
The power ofyour spells comes from your devotion to
your deity. Vouuse your Wisdom whenever a c1ericspell
refers toyour spellcasting ability. In addition, you use
your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw
DC for a cleric spell you cast and when making an
attack roll with one.
Spell saveDe ~8+your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Spell attack modifier =your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
RITUAL CASTING
Voucan cast a cleric spell as a ritual ifthat spell has the
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
SPELLCASTING Focus
Voucan use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus foryour cleric spells.
DIVINE DOMAIN
Choose one domain related toyour deity: Knowledge,
Life, Light, Nature, Tempest, Trickery, or War. Each
domain is detailed at the end ofthe class description,
and each one provides examples ofgods associated
with it.Your choice grants you domain spells and olher
features when you choose itat 1st leveI. Italso grants
you additional ways to use Channel Divinity when you
gain that feature at 2nd levei, and additional benefits at
6th, 8th, and 17th leveis.
DOMAIN SPELLS
Each domain has a list ofspells-its domain spells-
that you gain at the c1ericleveis noted in the domain
description. Once you gain a domain spell, you always
have itprepared, and itdoesn't count against the
number ofspells you can prepare each day.
Ifyou have a domain spell that doesn't appear on the
clericspelllist, the spell isnonetheless acleric spell for YOU.
CHANNEL DIVINITY
At 2nd levei,you gain the ability to channel divine
energy directly from your deity, using that energy to fuel
magical effects. Voustart with two such effects: Turn
Undead and an effect determined byyour domain. Some
domains grant you additional effects as you advance in
leveis, as noted in the domain description.
When you use your Channel Divinity. you choose
which effect to create. Voumust then finish a short or
long rest to use your Channel Divinity again.
Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws.
When you use such an effect from this class, the DC
equals your c1eric spell save DC.
Beginning at 6th leveI,you can use your Channel
Divinity twice between rests, and beginning at 18th levei,
you can use it three times between rests. When you finish
a short or long rest, you regain your expended uses.
CHANNEL DIVINITY: TURN UNDEAD
As an action, you present your holy symbol and speak a
prayer censuring the undead. Each undead that can see
or hear you within 30 feet ofyou must make a Wisdom
saving throw. Ifthe creature fails its saving throw, it is
turned for 1minute or until it takes any damage.
Aturned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as itcan, and it can't willingly
move to a space within 30 feet ofyou. lt also can't take
reactions. For its action, itcan use only the Dash action
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from
moving. Ifthere's nowhere to move, the creature can use
the Dodge action.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENTdomains of Knowledge, Life, and Light. As a cleric, you
choose one aspect ofyour deity's portfolio to emphasize,
and you are granted powers related to that domain.
Your choice might correspond to a particular sect
dedicated to your deity. Apollo, for example, could be
worshiped in one region as Phoebus ("radiant") Apollo,
emphasizing his influence over the Light domain,
and in a different place as Apollo Acesius ("healing"),
emphasizing his association with the Life domain.
Alternatively, your choice of domain could simply be a
malter of personal preference, the aspect of the deity
that appeals to you most.
Each domain's description gives examples ofdeities
who have influence over that domain. Gods are included
from the worlds of the Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk,
Dragonlance, and Eberron campaign seltings, as well as
from the Celtic, Greek, Norse, and Egyptian pantheons
of antiquity.
KNOWLEDCE DOMAIN SPELLSKNOWLEDGE DOMAIN
CHANNEL DIVINITY:
KNOWLEDGE OF THE AGES
Starting at 2nd leveI,you can use your Channel Divinity
to tap into a divine well of knowledge. As an action,
you choose one skill or tool. For 10minutes, you have
proficiency with the chosen skill or to 01.BLESSINGS OF KNOWLEDGE
At 1st leveI,you learn two languages ofyour choice.
Voualso become proficient in your choice of two of the
following skills: Arcana, History, Nature, or Religion.
Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check
you make that uses either of those skills.Spells
command, identify
augury, suggestion
nondeteetion, speak with dead
arcane eye, eanJusion
legend /ore, scryingCleric Levei
1st
3rd
5th
7th
9thThe gods of knowledge-including Oghma, Boccob,
Gilean, Aureon, and Thoth-value learning and
understanding above ali. Some teach that knowledge is
to be gathered and shared in libraries and universities,
or promote the practical knowledge of craft and
invention. Some deities hoard knowledge and keep its
secrets to themselves. And some promise their followers
that they will gain tremendous power if they unlock the
secrets ofthe multiverse. Followers of these gods study
esoteric lore, collect old tomes, delve into the secret
places of the earth, and learn ali they canoSome gods
of knowledge promote the practical knowledge ofcraft
and invention, including smith deities like Gond, Reorx,
Onatar, Moradin, Hephaestus, and Goibhniu.Starting at 5th leveI, when an undead fails its saving
throw against your Turn Undead feature, the creature is
instantly destroyed ifits challenge rating is at or below a
certain threshold, as shown in the Destroy Undead table.When you reach 4th leveI, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI,you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
DIVINE DOMAINSDESTROY UNDEAD
Cleric Levei Destroys Undead ofCR ...
5th 1/2 or lower
8th 1or lower
11th 2 or lower
14th 3 or lower
17th 4 or lower
DIVINE INTERVENTIONDESTROY UNDEAD
Beginning at 10th levei,you can call on your deity to
intervene on your behalf when your need is great.
1mploring your deity's aid requires you to use your
action. Describe the assistance you seek, and roll
percentile dice. Ifyou roll a number equal to or lower
than your cleric leveI,your deity intervenes. The DM
chooses the nature of the intervention; the effect ofany
cleric spell or cleric domain spell would be appropriate.
lf your deity intervenes, you can't use this feature
again for 7 days. Otherwise, you can use it again after
you finish a long rest.
At 20th leveI,your call for intervention succeeds
automatically, no roll required.
In a pantheon, every deity has influence over different
aspects of mortallife and civilization, called a deity's
domain. Ali the domains over which a deity has
influence are called the deity's portfolio. For example,
the portfolio of the Greek god Apollo includes theCHANNEL DIVINITY: READ THOUGHTS
At 6th leveI,you can use your Channel Divinity to read a
creature's thoughts. Voucan then use your access to the
creature's mind to command it.
P'\RT 1 CI ASSES
59
60Asan action, choose one creature that you can see
within 60 feet ofyou. That creature must make a
Wisdom saving throw. Ifthe creature succeeds on the
saving throw, you can't use this feature on itagain until
you finish along resl.
Ifthe creature fails itssave, you can read itssurface
thoughts (those foremost inits mind, reflecting its
current emotions and what itisactively thinking
about) when itiswithin 60 feet ofyou.This effect lasts
for I minute.
During that time, you can use your action toend this
effect and cast the suggestionspell on the creature
without expending aspell si 01.The target automatically
fails itssaving throw against the spell.
POTENT SPELLCASTING
Starting at8th levei,you add your Wisdom modifier to
the damage you deal with any cleric cantrip.
VISIONS OF THE PAST
Starting at 17thlevei,you can call upvisions ofthe
past that relate toan object you hold oryour immediate
surroundings. Vouspend at least I minute in meditation
and prayer, then receive dreamlike, shadowy glimpses
ofrecent events. Voucan meditate inthis way fora
number ofminutes equal toyour Wisdom score and
must maintain concentration during that time, as ifyou
were casting aspe11.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish ashort or long resto
Object Reading. Holding an object as you meditate,
you can see visions ofthe object's previous owner.
After meditating for I minute, you learn how the owner
acquired and lost the object, as well as the most recent
significant event involving the object and that owner.
Ifthe object was owned byanother creature inthe
recent past (within anumber ofdays equal toyour
Wisdom score), you can spend I additional minute
foreach owner tolearn the same information about
that creature.
Area Reading. Asyou meditate, you see visions
ofrecent events inyour immediate vicinity (aroom,
street, tunnel, clearing, or the like,up toa50-foot cube),
going back anumber ofdays equal toyour Wisdom
score. For each minute you meditate, you learn about
one significant event, beginning with the most recenl.
Significant events typically involve powerful emotions,
such as battles and betrayals, marriages and murders,
births and funerais. However, they might also include
more mundane events that are nevertheless important
inyour current situation.
LIFE DOMAIN
The Lifedomain focuses on the vibrant positive
energy-one ofthe fundamental forces ofthe universe-
that sustains alllife. The gods oflifepromote vitality
and health through healing the sick and wounded,
caring forthose inneed, and driving away the forces of
death and undeath. Almost any non-evil deity can claim
influence over this domain, particularly agricultural
deities (such as Chauntea, Arawai, and Demeter), sun
gods (such as Lathander, Pelor, and Re-Horakhty), gods
PART 1 , CLASSESofhealing or endurance (such as IlIllatcr, Mishakal,
Apollo, and Diancecht), and gods ofhome and
community (such as Hestia, Hathor, and Boldrei).
LIFE DOMAIN SPELLS
Cleric Levei Spells
1st b/ess, cure wounds
3rd lesserrestoration, spiritual weapon
5th beacon ofhope, revivify
7th death ward, guardian offaith
9th mass cure wounds, roise dead
BONUS PROFICIENCY
When you choose this domain at Ist levei,you gain
proficiency with heavy armor.
DISCIPLE OF LIFE
Also starting at 1stlevei,your healing spells are more
effective. Whenever you use aspell of 1stleveior higher
torestore hitpoints toacreature, the creature regains
additional hit points equal to2 +the spell's leveI.
CHANNEL DIVINITY: PRESERVE LIFE
Starting at2nd levei,you can use your Channel Divinity
toheal the badly injured.
Asan action, you present your holysymbol and
evoke healing energy that can restorc anumber ofhit
points equal tofivetimes your cleric leveI.Choose any
creatures within 30 feetofyou,and divide those hit
points among them. This feature can restore aereature
tono more than half ofitshit point maximum. Voucan't
use this feature on an undead or aconstruel.
BLESSED HEALER
Beginning at 6th levei,the healing spclls you cast on
others heal you as well. When you cast aspell of 1st
leveior higher that restores hit points toacreature
other than you,you regain hitpoints equal to2 +the
spell's leveI.
DIVINE STRIKE
At8th levei,you gain the ability toinfuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each ofyour turns
when you hitacreature with aweapon attack, you can
cause the attack todeal an extra Id8 radiant damage to
the targel. When you reach 14thlevei,the extra damage
increases to2d8.
SUPREM E HEALING
Starting at 17thlevei,when you would normally roll
one or more dice torestore hit points with aspell, you
instead use the highest number possible foreach die.
For example, instead ofrestoring 2<16hit points toa
creature, you restore 12.
LIGHT DOMAIN
Gods oflight-including Hehn, Lathander, Pholtus,
Branchala, the Silver Flame, Be1enus, Apollo, and
Re-Horakhty-promote the ideais afrebirth and
renewal, truth, vigilance, and beauty, often using the
symbol ofthe sun. Some afthcse go<lsare portrayed
as the sun itself or as acharioteer who guides the sun
across the sky. Olhers are tireless sentinels whose eyes
pierce every shadow and see through every deception.
Some are deities of heauty and artistry. who teach that
art is a vehic1e for the soul"s improvemenl. Clerics of a
god oflight are enlightened souls infused with radiance
and the power of (heir gods' discerning vision, charged
with chasing away lies and burning away darkness.
LICHT DOMAIN SPELLS
Cleric Levei Spells
1stburning hand',jaerie fire
3rdJlaming 'phere, ,eorching ray
5th day/ight,fireball
7thguardian offoith, walloffire
9thJlame ,trike, ,crying
BONUS CANTRIP
When you choose this domain at 1st levei, you gain the
Jightcantrip ifyou don't already know il.
WARDING FLARE
Also at 1st leveI, YOllcan interpose divine light between
yourself and an altacking enemy. When you are altacked
bya creature within 30 feet ofyou that you can see,
you can use your reaction to impose disadvantage on
the attack roll, causing light to fiare before the attacker
before it hits or misses. An attacker that can't be blinded
is immune to this feature.
Voucan use this feature a number of times equal to
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). Vou regain
ali expended uses when you finish a long resl.
CHANNEL DIVINITY: RADIANCE OF THE DAWN
Starting at 2nd leveI,you can use your Channel Divinity
to harness sunlight, banishing darkness and dealing
radiant damage to your foes.
As an action, you present your holy symbol, and any
magical darkness within 30 feet ofyou is dispelled.
Additionally, each hostile creature within 30 feel of
you must make a Constitution saving throw. Acreature
takes radiant damage equal to 2d1 O+your c1eric leveI
on a failed saving throw, and half as much damage on a
successful one. Acreature that has total cover from you
is not affected.
IMPROVED FLARE
Starting at 6th levei, you can also use your Warding
Fiare feature when a creature thal you can see within
30 feet ofyou attacks a creature other than YOU.NATURE DOMAIN
Gods of nature are as varied as the natural world
itself, from illscrutable gods of the deep forests (such
as Silvanus, Obad-Hai, Chislev, Balinor, and Pan) to
friendly deities associated with particular springs and
groves (such as Eldath). Druids revere nature as a
whole and might serve one of these deities, practicing
mysterious rites and reciting all-but-forgolten prayers in
their own secret tongue. But many of these gods have
c1erics as well, champions who take a more active role
in advancing the interests of a particular nature god.
These c1erics might hunt the evil monstrosities that
despoil the woodlands, bless the harvest of the faithful,
or wither the crops of those who anger their gods.
NATURE DOMAIN SPELLS POTENT SPELLCASTING
Starting at 8th leveI,you add your Wisdom modifier to
the damage you deal with any c1eric cantrip.
CORONA OF LIGHT
Starting at 17th levei,you can use your action to activate
an aura of sunlight that Jasts for 1 minute or until you
dismiss it using another action. Vou emit bright light in
a 60-foot radius and dim light 30 feet beyond tha!. Your
enemies in the bright Iight have disadvalltage on saving
throws against any spell that deals fire or radiant damage.Cleric Levei
1st
3rd
5th
7th
9thSpells
animal friend,hip, speak with animais
bark,kin, 'pike growth
plant growth, wind wall
dominate beast, gra'ping vine
inseet plague, tree stride
PART I CLASSES6
ACOLYTE OF NATURE
At 1stleveI,you learn one druid cantrip ofyour choice.
Voualso gain proticiency inone ofthe following skills of
your choice: Animal Handling, Nature, or Survival.righteousness or toencourage them tooffersacritices of
propitiation toward offdivine wrath.
TEMPEST DOMAIN SPELLS
TRICKERY DOMAINBONUS PROFICIENCIES
At 1stleveI,you gain proticiency with martia! weapons
and heavy armor.
STORMBORN
At 17thlevei,you have aflyingspeed equal to
your current walking speed whenever you are not
underground or indoors.Spells
fog c1oud, thunderwave
gust of wind, shatter
call fightning, sleet storm
control wate" ice storm
destructive wave, insect plagueCleric Levei
1st
3rd
5th
7th
9th
DIVINE STRIKE
At8th levei,you gain the ability toinfuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each ofyour turns
when you hitacreature with aweapon attack, you can
cause the attack todeal an extra ld8 thunder damage to
the target. When you reach 14thlevei,the extra damage
increases to2d8.THUNDERBOLT STRIKE
At6th leveI,when you deallightning damage toaLarge
or smaller creature, youcan also push itup to 10feet
away from YOU.
Gods oftrickery-such as Tymora, Beshaba,
Olidammara, the Traveler, Gari Glittergold, and
Loki-are mischief-makers and instigators who stand
as aconstant challenge tothe accepted order among
both gods and mortais. They're patrons ofthieves,
scoundrels, gamblers, rebels, and liberators. Their
clerics are adisruptive force inthe world, puncturing
pride, mocking tyrants, stealing from the rich, freeing
captives, and flouting hollow traditions. They preferCHANNEL DIVINITY: DESTRUCTIVE WRATH
Starting at 2nd leveI,you can use your Channel Divinity
towield the power ofthe storm with unchecked ferocity.
When you rolllightning orthunder damage, youcan
use your Channel Divinity todeal maximum damage,
instead ofrolling.WRATH OF THE STORM
Also at 1stlevei,you can thunderously rebuke attackers.
When acreature within 5feet ofyou that you can see
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
cause the creature tomake aDexterity saving throw.
The creature takes 2d8 lightning or thunder damage
(your choice) on afailed saving throw, and half as much
damage on asuccessful one.
Voucan use this feature anumber oftimes equal to
your Wisdom moditier (aminimum ofonce). Vouregain
ali expended uses when you tinish along rest.
MASTER OF NATURE
At 17thleveI,you gain the ability tocommand animais
and plant creatures. While creatures are charmed by
your Charm Animais and Plants feature, you can take
abonus action onyour turn toverbally command what
each ofthose creatures will doon its next turnoDAMPEN ELEMENTS
Starting at 6th leveI,when you or acreature within 30
feet ofyou takes acid, cold, tire, lightning, or thunder
damage, you can use your reaction togrant resistance to
the creature against that instance ofthe damage.
PART 1 ICLASSESDIVINE STRIKE
At8th levei,you gain the ability toinfuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each ofyour turns
when you hitacreature with aweapon attack, you
can cause the attack todeal an extra Id8 cold, tire, or
lightning damage (your choice) tothe target. When you
reach 14thleveI,the extra damage increases to2d8.
Gods whose portfolios include the Tempest domain-
including Talos, Umberlee, Kord, Zeboim, the
Devourer, Zeus, and Thor-govern storms, sea, and
sky.They include gods oflightning and thunder, gods
ofearthquakes, some tire gods, and certain gods of
violence, physical strength, and courage. Insome
pantheons, agod ofthis domain rules over other deities
and isknown forswiftjustice delivered bythunderbolts.
In the pantheons ofseafaring people, gods ofthis
domain are ocean deities and the patrons ofsailors.
Tempest gods send their clerics toinspire fear inthe
common folk,either tokeep those folkon the path ofTEMPEST DOMAINCHANNEL DIVINITY: CHARM ANIMALS
AND PLANTS
Starting at2nd levei,you can use your Channel Divinity
tocharm animaIs and plants.
Asan action, you present your holysymbol and invoke
the name ofyour deity. Each beast or plant creature that
can see youwithin 30 feet ofyou must make aWisdom
saving throw. Ifthe creature fails itssaving throw, itis
charmed byyou for 1minute or until ittakes damage.
While itischarmed byyou, itisfriendly toyou and other
creatures you designate.BONUS PROFICIENCY
Also at 1stleveI,you gain proticiency with heavyarmor.
6~
TRICKERY DOMAIN SPELLSsubterfuge, pranks, deception, and theft rather than
direct confrontation.
CHANNEL DIVINITY: CLOAK OF SHADOWS
Starting at 6th leveI, you can use your Channel
Divinity to vanish.
As an action, you become invisible until the end of your
next turnoYou become visible ifyou attack or cast a spell.BLESSING OF THE TRICKSTER
Starting when you choose this domain at 1st levei, you
can use your action to touch a willing creature other
than yourseif to give it advantage on Dexterity (Stealth)
checks. This blessing lasts for I hour or until you use
this feature again.Spells
divinefavor, shield offaith
magic weapon, spiritual weapon
crusader's mantle, spirit guardians
freedom of movement, stoneskin
fiame strike, hold monsterClerie levei
1st
3rd
5th
7th
9th
CHANNEL DIVINITY: WAR GOD'S BLESSING
At 6th levei, when a creature within 30 feet of you
makes an attack roll, you can use your reaction to grant
that creature a +10 bonus to the roll, using your Channel
Divinity. Vou make this choice after you see the roll, but
before the DM says whether the attack hits or misses.CHANNEL DIVINITY: GUIDED STRIKE
Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make
an attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain
a +10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you
see the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack
hits or misses.WAR PRIEST
From 1st !evel, your god delivers bolts of inspiration to
you while you are engaged in battle. When you use the
Attack action, you can make one weapon attack as a
bonus action.
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain
ali expended uses when you finish a long rest.BONUS PROFICIENCIES
At 1st levei, you gain proficiency with martial weapons
and heavy armor.WAR DOMAIN SPELLSwatch over warriors and reward them for their great
deeds. The clerics of such gods excel in battle, inspiring
others to fight the good fight or offering acts ofviolence
as prayers. Gods of war include champions of honor
and chivalry (such as Torm, Heironeous, and Kiri-
Jolith) as well as gods of destruction and pillage (such
as Erythnul, the Fury, Gruumsh, and Ares) and gods of
conquest and domination (such as Bane, Hextor, and
Maglubiyet). Other war gods (such as Tempus, Nike,
and Nuada) take a more neutra! stance, promoting war
in ali its manifestations and supporting warriors in any
circumstance.Spells
charm persan, disguise seI[
mirror imoge, pass without trace
blink, dispel magic
dimension door, po/ymorph
dominate person, modify memoryClerie levei
1st
3rd
5th
7th
9th
CHANNEL DIVINITY: INvOKE DUPLICITY
Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to create an illusory duplicate of yourself.
As an action, you create a perfect illusion of
yourself that !asts for I minute, or until you lose your
concentration (as ifyou were concentrating on a spell).
The iIlusion appears in an unoccupied space that you
can see within 30 feet of you. As a bonus action on your
turn, you can move the illusion up to 30 feet to a space
you can see, but it must remain within 120 feet of you.
For the duration, you can cast spells as though you
were in the iIlusion's space, but you must use your own
senses. Additionally, when both you and your illusion
are within 5 feet of a creature that can see the illusion,
you have advantage on attack rolls against that creature,
given how distracting the illusion is to the target.
DIVINE STRIKE
At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with poison-a gift from your deity. Once on each
of your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon
attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra Id8
poison damage to the target. When you reach 14th levei,
the extra damage increases to 2d8.
IMPROVED DUPLICITY
At 17th levei, you can create up to four duplicates
of yourseif, instead of one, when you use Invoke
Duplicity. As a bonus action on your turn, you can
move any number of them up to 30 feet, to a maximum
range of 120 feet.
WARDoMAINDIVINE STRIKE
At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 damage of the
same type dealt by the weapon to the target. When you
reach 14th levei, the extra damage increases to 2d8.
War has many manifestations. lt can make heroes of
ordinary people. It can be desperate and horrific, with
acts of cruelty and cowardice eclipsing instances of
excellence and courage. In either case, the gods of warAVATAR OF BATTLE
At 17th levei, you gain resistance to bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing damage from nonmagical weapons.
PART 1ICL-\SSES
P,\RT I CLASSESDRUID
Holding high agnarled slaffwrealhed wilh holly,an elf
summons lhe fury oflhe slorm and calls down explosive
bolls oflighlning tosmile lhe lorch-carrying orcs who
lhrealen her forest.
Crouching oul ofsighl on ahigh tree branch inlhe
form ofaleopard, ahuman peers oul oflhejungle aIlhe
slrange conslruclion ofalemple ofEvilElemenlal Air,
keeping aclose eyeon lhe cullists' aclivilies,
Swinging ablade formed ofpure fire,ahalf-elf
charges inlo amass ofskeletal soldiers, sundering
lhe unnalural magic lhat gives the foulcrealures the
mocking semblance oflife,
Whelher calling on lhe elemenlal forces ofnalure or
emulaling the crealures oflhe animal world, druids are
an embodimenl ofnature's resilience, cunning, and fury,
They claim nomaslery over nalure. Inslead, lhey see
lhemselves as exlensions ofnalure's indomilable will.
POWER OF NATURE
Druids revere nalure above ali, gaining lheir spells and
olher magical powers eilher from the force ofnalure
ilself or fram analure deily. Many druids pursue a
myslic spiriluality oflranscendent union with nature
ralher than devotion toadivine entity, while others
serve gods ofwild nature, animais, or elemental forces.
The ancienl druidic lraditions are sometimes called
the Old Failh, incontrast tothe worship ofgods in
temples and shrines.
Druid spells are oriented toward nature and animals-
the power oftoolh and claw, ofsun and moon, offire
and storm. Druids also gain the ability totake on animal
forms, and some druids make aparticular study ofthis
practice, even tothe point where they prefer animal
form totheir natural formo
PRESERVE THE BALANCE
For druids, nature exists inaprecarious balance. The
four elements that make upaworld-air, earth, fire,
CLASS FEATURES
As a druid, you gain the following class features.as a sign that becoming a druid
was part ofyour character's destiny.
Have you aJways been an adventurer
as part ofyour druidic calling, or did you
first spend time as a caretaker ofa sacred
grove or spring? Perhaps your homeland was
befouled byevil, and you took up an adventuring life in
hopes of finding a new home or purpose.
QUICK BUILD
VOUcan make a druid quickly by following these
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest
ability score, followed byConstitution. Second, choose
the hermit background.
HIT POINTS
Ui!Dice: Id8 per druid levei
UitPoints at 1st Levei: 8 +your Constitution modifier
Ui!Points at Uigher Leveis: Id8 (or 5) +your
Constitution modifier pcr druid levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields (druids will
not wear armor or use shields made ofmetal)
Weapons: Clubs, daggers, darts, javelins, maces,
quarlerstaffs, scimitars, sickles, slings. spears
Tools: Herbalism kit
Saving Throws: Intelligcnce, WisdomProficiency Cantrips-Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Levei Bonus Features Known 1st 2nd3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
1st +2 Druidic,Spellcasting 2 2
2nd +2 Wild Shape, Druid Cirele 2 3
3rd +2 2 4 2
4th +2 Wild Shape improvement, 3 4 3
Ability Score Improvement
5th +3 3 432
6th +3 Druid Cirele feature 3 4 3 3
7th +3 3 4 3 3 1
8th +3 Wild Shape improvement, 3 4 3 3 2
Ability Score Improvement
9th +4 3433 3 1
10th +4 Druid Circle feature 443 3 3 2
11th +4 4 4 3 3 3 2
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4433 3 2
13th +5 4 4 3332
14th +5 Druid Cirele feature 4 43 3 3 2
15th +5 4 4 3 3 3 2
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4 43 3 3 2
17th +6 4 433 3 2
18th +6 Timeless Body, Beast Spells 4 4 3 3 3 3
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4 4 3 3 3 3
20th +6 Archdruid 4 4 3 3 33
CREATING A DRUIDand water-must remain in equilibrium. Ifone element
were to gain power over the others, the world could be
destroyed, drawn into one ofthe eJemental planes and
broken apart into its component elements. Thus, druids
oppose cults of Elemental Evil and others who promote
one element to the exclusion ofothers.
Druids are also concerncd with the deJicate ecological
balance that sustains plant and animallife, and the need
for civilized folk to livein harmony with nature, not in
opposition to it. Druids accept that which is cruel in
nature, and they hate that which is unnatural, including
aberrations (such as beholders and mind f1ayers)
and undead (such as zombies and vampires). Druids
sometimes lead raids against such creatures, espccially
when the monsters encroach on the druids' territory.
Druids arc often found guarding sacred sites or
watching over regions ofunspoiled nature. But when a
significant danger arises, threatening nature's balance
or the lands they protecl, druids take on a more active
role in combating the threal, as adventurers.
When making a druid, consider why your character has
such a close bond with nature. Perhaps your character
lives in a society where the Old Faith slill thrives, or was
raised bya druid after being abandoned in the depths
ofa forcst. Perhaps your character had a dramatic
encounter with the spirits of nature, coming face to
face with a giant eagle or dire wolf and surviving lhe
experience. Maybe your character was born during an
epic storm or a volcanic eruption, which was interpreled
PART 1 I Cl~SSES
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Animal
Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception,
Religion, and Survival
EQUIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)a wooden shield or (b)any simple weapon
(a)a scimitar or (b)any simple melee weapon
Leather armor, an explorer's pack, and a druidic focus
DRUIDIC
Vouknow Druidic, the secret language ofdruids. Vou
can speak the language and use itto leave hidden
messages. Vouand others who know this language
automatically spot such a message. Others spot lhe
message's presence with a successful DC 15Wisdom
(Perception) check but can't decipher itwithout magic.
SPELLCASTING
Drawing on the divine essence ofnature itself, you
can cast spells to shape that essence toyour will. See
chapter 10for the general rules ofspellcasting and
chapter 11for the druid spell list.
CANTRIPS
At 1st levei,you know two cantrips ofyour choice from
the druid spelllist. Voulearn additional druid cantrips
ofyour choice at higher leveis, as shown in the Cantrips
Known column ofthe Druid table.one spell). The spells must be ofa levei for which you
have spell slots.
For example, ifyou are a 3rd-Ievel druid, you have four
1st-levei and two 2nd-levei spell slots, With a Wisdom
of 16,your list ofprepared spells can include six spells
of 1st ar 2nd levei, in any combination. Ifyou prepare
the lst.level spell cure wounds, you can cast itusing
a 1st-levei ar 2nd-levei slot. Casting the spell doesn't
remove itfrom your list ofprepared spells,
Voucan also change your list of prepared spells when
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list ofdruid
spells requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at
least 1minute per spelllevel for each spell on your list.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Wisdom isyour spellcasting ability foryour druid
spells, since your magic draws upon your devotion and
attunement to nature. Vouuse your Wisdom whenever
a spell refers toyour spellcasting ability. [n addition,
you use your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving
throw DC for a druid spell you cast and when making an
attack roll with one.
SpellsaveDC~8 +yourprofícíencybonus +
yourWisdommodifier
Spellattack modifier~yourproficiencybonus +
yourWisdommodifier
RITUAL CASTING
Voucan cast a druid spell as a ritual ifthat spell has the
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
••WILD SHAPESPELLCASTING Focus
Voucan use a druidic focus (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus foryour druid spells.
Voucan stay in a beast shape for a number of hours
eqllalto halfyollr drllid levei (rollnded down). YOllthen
revert toyour normal form unless you expend another
use ofthis feature. Voucan revert toyour normal
form earlier by using a bonus action on your turn, Vou
automatically revert ifYOllfali unconscious, drop to
Ohit points, or die.
While you are transformed, the following rules apply:Example
Wolf
Crocodile
GianteagleLimitations
Nofiyingorswimmingspeed
NofiyingspeedMax. CR
1/4
1/2
1Levei
2nd
4th
8thBEAST SHAPESStarting at 2nd levei,you can use your action to
magically assume the shape ofa beast that you have
seen before, Voucan use this feature twice. Vouregain
expended uses when you finish a short ar long rest.
Your druid levei determines the beasts you can
transform into, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. At
2nd levei, for example, you can transform into any beast
that has a challenge rating of 1(4ar lower that doesn't
have a f1yingar swimming speed,Â ~
SACREO PLANTS ANO WOOO
Adruidholdscertainplantsto besacred,particularlyalder,
ash, birch,elder,hazel,holly,juniper,mistletoe,oak,rowan,
willow,andyew.Druidsoftenusesuchplantsas partofa
spellcastíngfocus,incorporatinglengthsofoakoryewor
sprigsofmistletoe.
Similarly,adruiduses suchwoodsto makeotherobjects,
suchasweaponsandshields.Yewisassocíatedwíthdeath
and rebirth,soweaponhandlesforscimitarsorsicklesmight
befashionedfromil.Ashisassocíatedwithlifeandoak
withstrength.Thesewoodsmakeexcellenthaftsorwhole
weapons,suchasc1ubsorquarterstaffs,aswellasshields.
Alderisassocíatedwíthair,and itmightbeusedforthrown
weapons, such as darts or javelins.
Druidsfromregionsthat lackthe plantsdescribedhere
havechosenother plantstotakeonsimilaruses. For
instance,adruidofadesert regionmightvaluetheyucca
treeandcactus plants.
••PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS
The Druid table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st leveIand higher. Tocast one of
these druid spells, you must expend a slot ofthe spell's
levei ar higher. Vouregain ali expended spell slots when
you finish a long rest.
Vouprepare the list ofdruid spells that are available
foryou to cast, choosing from the druid spell list. When
you do so, choose a number ofdruid spells equal to
your Wisdom modifier +your druid levei (minimum of
66PART 1ICLASSES
Vourgame statistics are replaced bythe statistics of
the beast, butyou retain your alignment, personality,
and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Vou
also retain ali ofyour skill and saving throw proficien-
cies, inaddition togaining those ofthe creature. If
the creature has the same proficiency asyou and the
bonus inits stat block ishigher than yours, use the
creature's bonus instead ofyours. lfthe creature has
any legendary or lair actions, you can't use them.
When you transform, you assume the beast's hit
points and HitDice. When you revert toyour normal
form, you return tothe number ofhit points you had
before you transformed. However, ifyou rever! as a
result ofdropping toOhit points, any excess damage
carries over toyour normal formoFor example, ifyou
take lOdamage inanimal form and have only 1hit
point left,you revert and take 9damage. Aslong as
the excess damage doesn't reduce your normal form
toOhitpoints, you aren't knocked unconscious.
Voucan't cast spells, and your ability tospeak or
take any action that requires hands islimited tothe
capabilities ofyour beast formoTransforming doesn't
break your concentration on aspell you've already
cast, however, or prevent you from taking actions that
are part ofaspell, such as caJl Jightning, that you've
already cast.
Vouretain the benefit ofany features from your class,
race, or other source and can use them ifthe new
form isphysically capable ofdoing so. However, you
can't use anyofyour special senses, such as darkvi-
sion, unless your new form also has that sense.
Vouchoose whether your equipment falls tothe
ground inyour space, merges into your new form, or
isworn byit.Worn equipment functions as normal,
but the DMdecides whether itispractical forthe new
form towear apiece ofequipment, based on the crea-
ture's shape and size. Vourequipment doesn't change
size or shape tomatch the new
form, and anyequipment that
the new form can't wear
must either fali tothe
ground or merge with it.
Equipment that merges
with the form has no
effect until you leave
the formo
DRUID CIRCLE
At2nd levei,you choose to
identify with acircle ofdruids:
the Circle ofthe Land or the Circle ofthe Moon, both
detailed at the end ofthe class description. Vourchoice
grants you features at2nd levcland again at6th, 10th,
and 14thleveI.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI,you can increase one ability score of
your choice by2,oryou can increase two ability scores
ofyour choicc by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase an
ability score above 20 using this feature.TIMELESS BODY
Starting at 18th leveI,the primaI magic that youwield
causes you toage more slowly. For every 10years that
pass, your body ages only 1year.
BEAST SPELLS
Beginning at 18th leveI,you can cast many ofyour druid
spells inany shape you assume using Wild Shape. Vou
can perform the somatic and verbal components ofa
druid spell while inabeast shape, butyou aren't able to
provide material components.
ARCHDRUID
At20th levei,you can use your Wild Shape an unlimited
number oftimes.
68Additionally, you can ignore the verbal and somatic
components ofyour druid spells, as well as any material
components that lack acost and aren't consumed bya
spell. Vougain this benefit inboth your normal shape
and your beast shape from Wild Shape,
DRUID CIRCLES
Though their organization isinvisible tomost outsiders,
druids are part ofasociety that spans the land, ignoring
political borders, Alidruids are nominally members
ofthis druidic society, though some individuais are so
isolaled lhat lhey have never seen any high-ranking
members ofthe society or participated indruidic
gatherings. Druids recognize each other as brothers and
sislers, Likecreatures ofthe wilderness, however, druids
somelimes compete with oreven preyon each other,
Atalocal scale, druids are organized into circles that
share certain perspectives on nature, balance, and the
wayofthe druid,
CIRCLE OF THE LAND
The Circle ofthe Land ismade upofmystics and sages
who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites through
avast oral tradition, These druids meet within sacred
circles oftrees orstanding slones towhisper primai
secrets inDruidic, The circle's wisest members preside
as the chief priests ofcommunities lhat hold tothe Old
Faith and serve as advisors tothe rulers ofthose folk,
Asamember ofthis circle, your magic is inl1uenced
bythe land where you were initiated into the circle's
mysterious rites.
BONUS CANTRIP
When you choose this circle aI2nd leveI,you learn one
additional druid cantrip ofyour choice.
NATURAL RECOVERY
Starling at 2nd levei,you can regain some ofyour
magical energy bysitting inmeditation and communing
with nature, During ashort rest, you choose expended
spell slots torecover. The spell slols can have a
combined leveithat isequal toor less lhan halfyour
druid levei(rounded up),and none ofthe slots can be
6th leveior higher. Voucan't use this feature again until
you finish along rest
For example, when YOllare a4th-levei druid, YOllcan
recover uptotwo leveis worth ofspell slots, Voucan
recover either a2nd-levei slot or two 1sI-leveIslots,
CIRCLE SPELLS
Vourmystical connection tothe land infllses you with
lhe ability locast certa inspells, At3rd, 5th, 7th, and
9th leveiyou gain access tocircle spells connecled
tothe land where YOllbecame adrllid, Choose that
land-arctic, coast, desert, forest, grassland. mountain,
swamp, or Underdark-and consult the associated
list ofspells,
Once YOllgain access loacircle spell. YOllalways have
ilprepared, and itdoesn't count against the nllmber of
spells you can prepare each day.lfyoll gain access toa
spell that doesn't appear on the drllid spelllist, the spell
isnonetheless adrllid spell forYOll,
PART 1 ICLASSESARCTIC
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd hold person, spike growth
5th sleet storm, slow
7th freedom of movement, ice storm
9th com mune with nature, cone of cold
COAST
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd mirror image, misty step
5th water breathing, water walk
7th control water,freedom of movement
9th conjure elemental, scrying
DESERT
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd blur, silence
5th create food and water, protection from energy
7th blight, haf/ucinatory terrain
9th insect plague, waf/ of stone
FOREST
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd barkskin, spider c/imb
5th caf/lightning, plant growth
7th divination,freedom of movement
9th com mune with nature, tree stride
GRASSLAND
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd invisibility, pass without trace
5th daylight, haste
7th divination,freedom of movement
9th dream, insect plague
MOUNTAIN
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd spider c/imb, spike growth
5th lightning bolt, meld into stone
7th stone shape, stoneskin
9th passwall, waf/ of stone
SWAMP
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd darkness, Melf's acid arrow
5th water walk, stinking c/oud
7th freedom of movement, loca te creature
9th insect plague, scrying
UNDERDARK
Druid Levei Circle Spells
3rd spider climb, web
5th gaseous form, stinking c/oud
7th greater invisibility, stone shape
9th c/oudkif/, insect plague
LAND'S STRIDE
Starting at 6th levei, moving through nonmagical
difficult terrain costs you no extra movement. Voucan
also pass through nonmagical plants without being
slowed bythem and without taking damage from them if
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard.
Inaddition, youhave advantage on saving throws against
plants that are magically created ormanipulated toimpede
movement, such those created bythe entanglespell.PRIMAL STRIKE
Starting at 6th levei,your attacks in beast form eount as
magical forthe purpose ofovercoming resistance and
immunity to nonmagieal attaeks and damage.
ELEMENTAL WILD SHAPE
At 10th levei,you can expend two uses ofWild Shape
at the same time to transform into an air elemental, an
earth elemental, a fire elemental, or a water elemental.
THOUSAND FORMS
By14th levei,you have learned to use magie to alter
your physical form in more subtle ways. Voucan cast the
alter selfspell at will.
DRUIOS ANO THE COOS
Some druids venerate the forces of nature themselves, but
most druids are devoted to one of the many nature deities
worshiped in the multiverse (the Iists of gods in appendix
Binelude many such deities). The worship ofthese deities
is often considered a more ancient tradition than the faiths
of elerics and urbanized peoples. In fact, in the world of
Greyhawk, the druidic faith is called the Old Faith, and it
elaims many adherents among farmers, foresters, fishers,
and others who live elosely with nature. This tradition
ineludes the worship of Nature as a primai force beyond
personification, but also encompasses the worship of Beory,
the Oerth Mother, as well as devotees ofObad.Hai, Ehlonna,
and Ulaa.
In the worlds of Greyhawk and the Forgotten Realms,
druidic cireles are not usually connected to the faith of a
single nature deity. Any given cirele in the Forgotten Realms,
for example, might inelude druids who revere Silvanus,
Mielikki, Eldath, Chauntea, or even the harsh Gods of Fury:
Talos, Malar, Auril, and Umberlee. These nature gods are
often called the First Cirele, the first among the druids, and
most druids count them ali (even the violent ones) as worthy
af veneration.
The druids of Eberron hold animistic beliefs completely
unconnected to the Sovereign Host, the Dark Six, or any of
the other religions of the world. They believe that every living
thing and every natural phenomenon-sun, moon, wind,
fire, and the world itself-has a spiri!. Their spells, then, are
ameans to communicate withand command these spirits.
Different druidic sects, though, hold different philosophies
about the proper relationship of these spirits to each other
and to the forces of civilization. The Ashbound, for example,
believe that arcane magic is an abomination against nature,
the Children ofWinter venerate the forces of death, and the
Gatekeepers preserve ancient traditions meant to protect the
world from the incursion of aberrations.NATURE'S WARD
When you reach 10th levei,you can't be charmed or
frightened byelementals or fey,and you are immune to
poison and disease.
NATURE'S SANCTUARY
When you reach 14th levei, creatures ofthe natural
world sense your connection tonature and become
hesitant to attack you. When a beast or plant creature
attacks you, that creature must make a Wisdom saving
throw against your druid spell save DC. On a failed save,
the creature must choose a different target, or the attack
automatically misses. On a successful save, the creature
is immune to this effect for 24 hours.
The creature is aware ofthis effect before itmakes its
attack against you.
CIRCLE OF THE MOON
Druids ofthe Circle ofthe Moon are fierce guardians
ofthe wilds. Their order gathers under the full moon to
share news and trade warnings. They haunt thc deepest
parts ofthe wilderness, where they might go forweeks
on end before crossing paths with another humanoid
creature, let alone another druid.
Changeable as the moon, a druid ofthis circle might
prowl as a great cat one night, soar over the treetops
as an eagle the next day, and crash through the
undergrowth in bear form to drive offa trespassing
monster. The wild is in the druid's blood.
COMBAT WILD SHAPE
When you choose this circle at 2nd levei,you gain the
ability to use Wild Shape on your turn as a bonus action,
rather than as an action.
Additionally, while you are transformed byWild
Shape. you can use a bonus action toexpend one
spell slot to regain ld8 hit points per levei ofthe spell
slot expended.
CIRCLE FORMS
The rites ofyour circle grant you the ability to transform
into more dangerous animal forms. Starting at 2nd
levei,you can use your Wild Shape to transform into a
beast with a challenge rating as high as 1(you ignore
the Max. CR eolumn ofthe Beast Shapes table, but must
abide bythe other limitations there).
Starting at 6th levei,you can transform into a beast
with achallenge rating as high as your druid leveI
divided by3, rounded down.•• •••
CLASSES
h9
70PART 1 ICLASSESFIGHTER
Ahuman in clanging plate armor holds her shield
before her as she runs toward the massed goblins. An
elf behind her, clad in studded leather armor, peppers
the goblins with arrows loosed from his exquisitc
bow. The half-orc nearby shouls orders, helping
lhe lwo combalanls coordinate their assault to the
best advantage.
Adwarf in chain mail interposes his shield between
the ogre's club and his companion, knocking the dcadly
blow aside. His companion, a half-elf in scale armor,
swings two scimitars in a blinding whirl as she circles
the ogre, looking for a blind spot in its defenses.
Agladiator fighls for sport in an arena, a master with
his trident and net, skilled at toppling foes and moving
them around for the crowd's delight-and his own
tactical advantage. His opponent's sword fiares with
blue light an instant beforc she sends lightning fiashing
forth to smite him.
Ali ofthese heroes are fighlers, perhaps the most
diverse class ofcharacters in the worlds of DUNGEONS &
DRAGONS. Questing knighls, conquering overlords, royal
champions, elite foot soldiers, hardened mercenaries,
and bandit kings-as fighters, they ali share an
unparalleled mastery with weapons and armor, and a
thorough knowledge of the skills ofcombat. And they
are well acquainted with death, both meting itout and
staring itdefiantly in lhe face.
WELL-RoUNDED SPECIALISTS
Fighters learn the basics ofali combat styles. Every
fighter can swing an axe, fence wilh a rapier, wield a
longsword or a grealsword, use a bow, and even trap foes
in a net with some degree ofskill. Likewise, a fighler is
adept with shields and every form ofarmor. Beyond that
basic degree offamiliarity, each fighler specializes in a
cerlain style ofcombat. Some concentrate on archery,
some on fighting with two weapons aI once, and some
on augmenting their martial skills with magic. This
combination ofbroad general ability and extensive
specialization makes fighters superior combatants
on battlefields and in dungeons alike.
TRAINED FOR DANGER
•Nol every member of the cily walch, lhe village mililia,
or the queen's army is a fighter. Mosl ofthese lroops are
relatively untrained soldiers wilh only lhe mosl basic
combat knowledge. Veleran soldiers, mililary officers,
lrained bodyguards, dedicated knighls, and similar
figures are fighlers.
Features
Fighting Style, Second Wind
Action Surge (one use)
Martial Arehetype
Ability Seore Improvement
Extra Attaek
Ability Score Improvement
Martial Archetype feature
Ability Seore Improvement
Indomitable (one use)
Martial Arehetype feature
Extra Attaek (2)
Ability Seore Improvement
Indomitable (two uses)
Ability Seore Improvement
Martial Arehetype feature
Ability Seore Improvement
Aetion Surge (two uses). Indomitable
(three uses)
Martial Arehetype feature
Ability Seore Improvement
Extra Attaek (3)Proficiency
Bonus
+2
+2
+2
+2
+3
+3
+3
+3
+4
+4
+4
+4
+5
+5
+5
+5
+6
+6
+6
+618th
19th
20thLevei
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17thTHE FICHTER
Some fighters feel drawn to use their training as
adventurers. The dungeon delving, monster slaying, and
other dangerous work common among adventurers is
second nature fora fighter, not ali that different from
the lifehe ar she left behind. There are greater risks,
perhaps, but also much greater rewards-few fighters in
the citywatch have the opportunity to discover a magic
flame tongue sword, forexample.
CREATING A FIGHTER
Asyou build your fighter, think about two related
elements ofyour character's background: Where did
you getyour combat training, and what set you apar!
from the mundane warriors around you? Were you
particularly ruthless? Didyou get extra help from a
mentor, perhaps because ofyour exceptional dedication?
What drove you to this training in the first place? A
threat toyour homeland, a thirsl forrevenge, ar a need
to prove yourself might ali have been factors.
Voumight have enjoyed formal training in a noble's
army ar in a local militia. Perhaps you trained in awar
academy, learning strategy, tactics, and military history.
Or you mighl be self-taught-unpolished but well tested.
Didyou take up the sword as a way to escape the limits
oflifeon a farm, ar are you following a proud family
tradition? Where did you acquire your weapons and
armar? They might have been military issue ar family
heirlooms. ar perhaps you scrimped and saved foryearsto buy them. Your armaments are now among your
most important possessions-the only things that stand
between you and death's embrace.
QUICK BUILD
Voucan make a fighter quickly byfollowing these
suggestions. first, make Strength ar Dexterity your
highest ability score, depending on whether you
want tofocus on melee weapons ar on archery (ar
finesse weapons). Your next-highest score should be
Constitution, ar Intelligence ifyou plan to adopt the
Eldritch Knight martial archetype. Second, choose
the soldier background.
CLASS FEATURES
As a fighter, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS
Ui! Dice: IdlO per fighter levei
Ui! Points at 1st Levei: 10 +your Constitution modifier
Uit Points at Uigher LeveIs: IdlO (ar 6) +your
Constitution modifier per fighter levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armar: Aliarmar, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: Nane
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
PART 1ICL~SSES7
1
72Skills: Choose two skills from Acrobatics, Animal
Handling, Athletics, History, [nsight, [ntimidation,
Perception, and Survival
EQUIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)chain mail or (b)leather, longbow, and 20 arrows
(a) amartial weapon and ashield or (b)two martial
weapons
(a)a Iight crossbow and 20 bolts or (b)two handaxes
(a)a dungeoneer's pack or (b)an explorer's pack
FIGHTING STYLE
Vouadopt a particular style of fighting as your specialty,
Choose one ofthe following options. Voucan't take a
Fighting Style option more than once, even ifyou later
get to choose again.
ARCHERY
Vougain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with
ranged weapons.
DEFENSE
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1bonus toAC.
DUELING
When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
with that weapon,
GREAT WEAPON FIGHTING
When you roll a 1or 2 on a damage die for an attack you
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new
roll, even ifthe new roll is a 1or a 2. The weapoo must
have the two-handed or versatile property foryou to gaio
this benefit.
PROTECTION
When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet ofYOtl,you can use your
reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll. Vou
must be wielding a shield.
TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING
When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add
your ability modifier to the damage of lhe second attack.
SECOND WIND
Vouhave a limited well ofstamina that you can draw on
to protect YOtlrselffrom harm. On your turn, you can use
a bonus action to regain hit points equal to ld10 +your
fighter leveI.
Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or
long rest before you can use itagain.
ACTION SURGE
Starting at 2nd leveI,Yotlcan push yourself beyond yotlr
normallimits for a momento On your turn, you can take
one additional action on top ofyour regular action and a
possible bonus action.
PART 1 ICLASSESOnce you use this feature, you must finish a short or
long rest before you can use itagain. Starting at 17th
levei,you can use ittwice before a rest, but only once on
the same turno
MARTIAL ARCHETYPE
At 3rd leveI,you choose an archetype that you strive to
emulate inyour combat styles and techniques. Choose
Champion, Battle Master, or Eldritch Knight, ali detailed
at the end ofthe c1ass description. The archetype you
choose grants you features at 3rd leveIand again at 7th,
10th, 15th, and 18th leveI.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 6th, 8th, 12th,
14th, 16th, and 19th leveI,you can increase one ability
score ofyour choice by 2, or you can increase two ability
seores ofyour choice by 1.As normal, you can't increase
ao ability score above 20 using this feature.
EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI,you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno
The number ofattacks increases to three wheo you
reach 11th leveIin this c1ass and to four when you reach
20th leveIin this c1ass.
INDOMITABLE
Beginning at 9th leveI,you can reroll a saving throw that
you fail. Ifyou do 50,Yotlmust use the new roll, and you
can't use this feature again until you finish a long resto
Voucan use this feature twice between [ong rests
starting at 13th levei and three times between long rests
starting at 17th leveI.
MARTIAL ARCHETYPES
Different fighters choose different approaches to
perfectiog their fighting prowess. The martial archetype
you choose to emulate renects your approach.
CHAMPION
The archetypal Champion focuses on the development
ofraw physical power honed to deadly perfection.
Those who model themselves on this archetype combine
rigorous traioing with physical excellence to deal
devastati ng blows.
IMPROVED CRITICA L
Beginning when you choose this archetype at 3rd
leveI, your weapon attacks score a criticaI hit on a
roll of 19 or 20.
REMARKABLE ATHLETE
Starting at 7th level,you can add half yotlr proficiency
bonus (round up) to any Strength, Dexterity, or
Constitutioo check you make that doesn't already use
your proficiency bonus.
[n addition, when you makc a running longjump, the
distance you can cover increases bya number of feet
equal toyotlr Strength modifier.
ADDITIONAL FIGHTING STYLE
At 10th levei,you can choose asecond option from the
Fighting Style class feature.
SUPERIOR CRITICAL
Starting at 15th leveI,your weapon attacks score a
criticaI hiton aroll of 18-20.
SURVIVOR
At 18th levei,you attain the pinnacle ofresilience in
battle. Atthe start ofeach ofyour turns, you regain hit
points equal to5 +your Constitution modifier ifyou
have no more than half ofyour hitpoints left.Voudon't
gain this benefit ifyou have Ohitpoints.
BATTLE MASTER
Those who emulate the archetypal Battle Master
employ martial techniques passed down through
generations. ToaBattle Master, combat isan academic
field,sometimes including subjects beyond battle such
as weaponsmithing and calligraphy. Not every fighter
absorbs the lessons ofhistory, theory, and artistry
that are reflected inthe Battle Master archetype, but
those who doare well-rounded fighters ofgreat skill
and knowledge.
COMBAT SUPERIORITY
When you choose this archetype at 3rd leveI,you
learn maneuvers that are fueled byspecial dice called
superiority dice.
Maneuvers. Voulearn three maneuvers ofyour
choice, which are detailed under "Maneuvers" below.
Many maneuvers enhance an atlack insome way.Vou
can use only one maneuver per attack.
Voulearn two additional maneuvers ofyour choice
at 7th, 10th, and 15th leveI.Each time you learn new
maneuvers, you can also replace one maneuver you
know with adifferent one.
Superiority Diee. Vouhave four superiority dice,
which are d8s. Asuperiority die isexpended when you
use it.Vouregain ali ofyour expended superiority dice
when you finish ashort or long rest.
Vougain another superiority die at 7th leveIand one
more aI 15th leveI.
Saving Throws. Some ofyour maneuvers require
your target lOmake asaving throw toresist the
maneuver's effects. The saving throw DCiscalculated
as follows:
Maneuver save De ~ 8 +your profieieney bonus +
your 5trength or Dexterity modifier (your ehoiee)
STUDENT OF WAR
At3rd leveI,you gain proficiency with one type of
artisan's tools ofyour choice.
KNOW YOUR ENEMY
Starting at 7th levei,ifyou spend at least 1minute
observing or interacting with another creature outside
combat, you can learn certain information about its
capabilities compared toyour own. The DMtells you if
lhe creature isyour equal, superior, or inferior inregard
totwo ofthe following characteristics ofyour choice:
PA TI (l '\SSES"3
74Strength score
Dexterity score
Constitution score
Armor Class
Current hit points
Total class leveIs (ifany)
Fighter class leveIs (ifany)
IMPROVED COMBAT SUPERIORITY
At 10th levei,your superiority dice turn into dlOs, At
18th levei, they turn into d12s,
RELENTLESS
Starting at 15th levei,when you roll initiative and
have no superiority dice remaining, you regain 1
superiority die,
MANEUVERS
The maneuvers are presented in alphabetical order,
Commander's Stríke. When you take the Attack
action on your turn, you can forgo one ofyour attacks
and use a bonus action to direct one ofyour companions
to strike, When you do so, choose a friendly creature
who can see or hear you and expend one superiority die,
That creature can immediately use its reaction to make
one weapon attack, adding the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\.
Dísarmíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to disarm the target, forcing it to drop one item
ofyour choice that it's holding, Vouadd the superiority
die to the attack's damage roll, and the target must
make a Strength saving throw, On a failed save, itdrops
the object you choose, The object lands at its fee!.
Dístractíng Strike. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
distract the creature, giving your allies an opening, Vou
add the superiority die to the attack's damage rol\. The
next attack roll against the target byan attacker other
than you has advantage ifthe attack is made before the
start ofyour next turn,
Evasíve Footwork. When you move, you can expend
one superiority die, rolling the die and adding the
number rolled toyour ACuntil you stop moving,
Feíntíng Attack. Voucan expend one superiority die
and use a bonus action on your turn to feint, choosing
one creature within 5 feet ofyou as your targe!. Vou
have advantage on your next attack roll against that
creature, Ifthat attack hits, add the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\.
GoadíngAttack. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to goad the target into attacking you, Vouadd
the superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and
the target must make a Wisdom saving throw, On a
failed save, the target has disadvantage on ali attack
rolls against targets other than you until the end of
your next turn,
Lungíng Attack. When you make a melee weapon
attack on your turn, you can expend one superiority die
to increase your reach for that attack by5 feet. ]fyou hit,
you add the superiority die to the attack's damage rol\.
PART 1 ICLASSESManeuveríng Attack. When you hit a creature with
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
die to maneuver one ofyour comrades into a more
advantageous position, Vouadd the superiority die to the
attack's damage roll, and you choose a friendly creature
who can see or hear you, That creature can use its
reaction to move up to half its speed without provoking
opportunity attacks from the target ofyour attack.
MenaCÍngAttack. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to frighten the target. Vouadd the superiority
die to the attack's damage roll, and the target must
make a Wisdom saving throw, On a failed save, itis
frightened ofyou until the end ofyour next turn,
Parry.When another creature damages you with a
melee attack, you can use your reaction and expend one
superiority die to reduce the damage bythe number you
roll on your superiority die +your Dexterity modifier,
PreCÍsíonAttack. When you make a weapon attack
roll against a creature, you can expend one superiority
die to add itto the rol\. Voucan use this maneuver
before or after making the attack roll, but before any
effects ofthe attack are applied,
Pushíng Attack. When you hit a creature with
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
die to attempt to drive the target back. Vouadd the
superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and if the
target is Large or smaller, it must make a Strength
saving throw, On a failed save, you push the target up
to 15 feet away from you,
Rally.On your turn, you can use a bonus action and
expend one superiority die to bolster the resolve ofone
ofyour companions. When you do so, choose a friendly
creature who can see or hear you, That creature gains
temporary hit points equal to the superiority die roll +
your Charisma modifier,
Ríposte. When a creature misses you with a melee
attack, you can use your reaction and expend one
superiority die to make a melee weapon attack against
the creature, ]fyou hit, you add the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\.
Sweepíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a
melee weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
die to attempt to damage another creature with the
same attack, Choose another creature within 5 feet
ofthe original target and within your reach, Ifthe
original attack roll would hit the second creature, it
takes damage equal to the number you roll on your
superiority die, The damage is ofthe same type dealt by
the original attack,
TrípAttack. When you hit a creature with a weapon
attack, you can expend one superiority die to attempt
to knock the target down, Vouadd the superiority die
to the attack's damage roll, and ifthe target is Large or
smaller, it must make a Strength saving throw, On a
failed save, you knock the target prone,
ELDRITCH KNIGHT
The archetypal Eldritch Knight combines the martial
mastery common to ali fighters with a careful study of
magic. Eldritch Knights use magical techniques similar
to those practiced bywizards, They focus their study
on two of the eight schools of magic: abjuration and
evocation. Abjuration spells grant an Eldritch Knight
additional protection in battle, and evocation spells deal
damage to many foes at once, extending the fighter's
reach in combat. These knights learn a comparatively
small number of spells, committing them to memory
instead of keeping them in a spellbook.
SPELLCASTING
When you reach 3rd levei, you augment your martial
prowess with the ability to cast spells. See chapter 10
for the general rules of spellcasting and chapter 11 for
the wizard spelllist.
Cantrips. Voulearn two cantrips ofyour choice fram
the wizard spell list. Vou learn an additional wizard
cantrip ofyour choice at 10th leveI.
SpeJlSlots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table
shows how many spell slots you have to cast your
spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of these
spells, you must expend a slot ofthe spell's levei or
higher. Vouregain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
For example, ifyou know the Ist.level spell shieIdand
have a Ist.level and a 2nd.level spell slot available, you
can castshieIdusing either slot.
SpeJls Known of1st-LeveI and Higher. Vouknow
three 1st.level wizard spells ofyour choice, two ofwhich
you must choose from the abjuration and evocation
spells on the wizard spelllist.
The Spells Known column of the Eldritch Knight
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard
spells of 1st levei or higher. Each of these spells must be
an abjuration or evocation spell ofyour choice, and must
be of a leveI for which you have spell slots. For instance,
when you reach 7th levei in this c1ass, you can learn one
new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
The spells you learn at 8th, 14th, and 20th leveI can
come from any school of magic.
Whenever you gain a leveI in this c1ass, you can
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another
spell ofyour choice from lhe wizard spelllist. The
new spell must be ofa leveI for which you have spell
slots, and it must be an abjuration or evocation spell,
unless you're replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th,
or 20th leveI.
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting
ability foryour wizard spells, since you learn your
spells through study and memorization. Vouuse your
lntelligence whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting
ability. In addition, you use your Intelligence modifier
when setting lhe saving throw Defor a wizard spell you
cast and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC ~ 8 +your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
Spell attack modifier =your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
WEAPON BOND
At 3rd levei, you learn a ritual that creates a magical
bond between yourself and one weapon. Vouperform
the ritual over the course of I hour, which can be doneELDRITCH KNIGHT SPELLCASTlNG
-Spell Slots per Spell Level-FIghter Cantrips Spells
Levei Known Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
3rd 2 3 2
4th 2 4 3
5th 2 4 3
6th 2 4 3
7th 2 5 4 2
8th 2 6 4 2
9th 2 6 4 2
10th 3 7 4 3
11th 3 8 4 3
12th 3 8 4 3
13th 3 9 4 3 2
14th 3 10 4 3 2
15th 3 10 4 3 2
16th 3 11 4 3 3
17th 3 11 4 3 3
18th 3 11 4 3 3
19th 3 12 4 3 3
20th 3 13 4 3 3
during a short rest. The weapon must be within your
reach throughout the ritual, at the conc1usion ofwhich
you touch the weapon and forge the bond.
ance you have bonded a weapon to yourself, you
can't be disarmed of that weapon unless you are
incapacitated. lf Itis on the same plane of existence,
you can summon that weapon as a bonus action on your
turn, causing it to teleport instantiy to your hand.
Voucan have up to two bonded weapons, but can
summon only one at a time with your bonus action.
1fyou attempt to bond with a third weapon, you must
break the bond with one of the other two.
WAR MAGIC
Beginning at 7th levei, when you use your action to
cast a cantrip, you can make one weapon attack as a
bonus actiou.
ELDRITCH STRIKE
At 10th levei,you learn how to make your weapon
strikes undercut a creature's resistance to your spells.
When you hit a creature with a weapon attack, that
creature has disadvantage on the next saving throw
it makes against a spell you cast before the end of
your next turno
ARCANE CHARGE
At 15th levei, you gain the ability to teleport up to 30
feet to an unoccupied space you can see when you use
your Action Surge. Voucan teleport before or after the
additional actioll.
IMPROVED WAR MAGIC
Starting at 18th levei, when you use your action to
cast a spell, you can make one weapon attack as a
bonus actiOIl.
PART I C'l~SSES
J
PART I ICLASSESHer fists a blur as lhey detlect an incoming hail of arrows,
a half-elf springs over a barrieade and lhrows herself
into lhe massed ranks of hobgoblins on lhe olher side.
She whirls among lhem. knocking lheir blows aside and
sending them reeling. unlil allasl she slands alone.
Taking a deep breath. a human eovered in tattoos
seltles inlo a battle stanee. As lhe tirsl eharging ores
reaeh him. he exhales and a blasl of tire roars from his
moulh, engulting his foes.
Moving wilh lhe silenee of lhe nighl, a blaek-c1ad
halfling sleps inlo a shadow benealh an areh and
emerges from anolher inky shadow on a balcony a
stone's lhrow away. She slides her blade free of ils c1oth-
wrapped seabbard and peers lhrough lhe open window
aI lhe lyranl prinee. so vulnerable in lhe grip of sleep.
Whalever lheir discipline, monks are uniled in lheir
abilily lo magically harness lhe energy lhal tlows in
lheir bodies. Whelher ehanneled as a slriking display
of eombal prowess or a subI ler foeus of defensive abilily
and speed, lhis energy infuses alllhal a monk does.
THE MAGIC OF KI
Monks make eareful sludy of a magieal energy lhal mos I
monaslie lradilions eall ki.This energy is an elemenl
of lhe magie lhal suffuses lhe mulliverse-speeitieally,
lhe elemenl lhat flows lhrough Iiving bodies. Monks
harness this power wilhin lhemsclves lo ereate magieal
effeels and exeeed their bodies' physieal eapabililies.
and some of lheir special attaeks ean hinder lhe tlow of
ki in lheir opponenls. Using lhis energy. monks ehannel
uneanny speed and slrenglh inlo lheir unarmed slrikes.
As lhey gain experienee. lheir marlial lraining and lheir
maslery ofki gives them more power over lheir bodies
and lhe bodies of their foes.
TRAINING AND ASCETICISM
Small walled c10islers doI the landseapes of lhe worlds
of0&0.liny refuges from the tlow of ordinary Iife,
where time seems lo stand stil!. The monks who live
lhere seek personal perfeetion lhrough eonlemplation
and rigorous lraining. Many enlered lhe monastery
as ehildren. senl lo Iive lhere when lheir parents died,
when food eouldn't be found lo sllpport lhem, or in
return for some kindness that the monks had performed
for lheir families.
Some monks Iive entirely apart from the surrollnding
populalion. secluded from anyl hing lhat might impede
their spirilllal progresso Olhers are sworn lo isolalion,
Proficieney Marlial Ki Unarmored
Bonus Arls Points Movement Features
1st +2 ld4 Unarmored Defense, Martial Arts
2nd +2 1d4 2 +10 ft. Ki, Unarmored Movement
3rd +2 ld4 3 +10 fI. Monastie Tradition, Defleet Missiles
4th +2 1d4 4 +10 fI. Ability Seore Improvement, Slow Fali
5th +3 1d6 5 +10 ft. Extra Attaek, Stunning Strike
6th +3 1d6 6 +15 ft. Ki-Empowered Strikes, Monastie Tradition feature
7th +3 ld6 7 +15 ft. Evasion, Stillness of Mind
8th +3 1d6 8 +15 ft. Ability Seore Improvement
9th +4 1d6 9 +15 ft. Unarmored Movement improvement
10th +4 ld6 10 +20 ft. Purity of Body
11th +4 ld8 11 +20 fI. Monastic Tradition feature
12th +4 ld8 12 +20 fI. Ability Seore Improvement
13th +5 ld8 13 +20 fI. Tongue of the Sun and Moon
14th +5 ld8 14 +25 fI. Diamond Sou I
15th +5 ld8 15 +25 fI. Timeless Body
16th +5 1d8 16 +25 fI. Ability Seore Improvement
17th +6 1d10 17 +25 fI. Monastie Tradition feature
18th +6 1d10 18 +30 fI. Empty Body
19th +6 ldlO 19 +30 ft. Ability Score Improvement
20th +6 ldl0 20 +30 ft. Perfeel Self
emerging only lo serve as spies or assassins ai the
command of lheir leader, a noble palron, or some other
morlal or divine power.
The majorily of monks don'l shun Iheir neighbors,
making frequenl visilS lOnearhy lowns or villages and
exchanging Iheir servicc for food and other goods. As
versalile warriors, monks oflen end up prolecting their
neighbors fram monsters or Iyranls.
For a monk, bccoming an advenlllrer means leaving
a struelured, communallift'slyle lo become a wanderer.
This can be a harsh transition, and monks don't
undertake illightly. Those who leave their cloisters take
their work seriollsly, approaching Iheir adventures as
personal tesls of Iheir physical and spiritual growth.
As a rule, monks care lillle for material wealth and are
driven bya desire lo aceomplish a grealer mission than
merely slaying monsters and plundering Iheir treasure.
CREATING A MONK
As you make your monk characler, Ihink about your
connection lOlhe monaslery where you leamed your
skills and spenl your formal iveyears. Were you an
orphan or a child left on lhe monaslery's threshold? Did
your parents promise YOlllo the monastery in gratitude
for a service performed bylhe lllonks? Didyou enler
Ihis secluded life lo hide from a crime you committed?
Or did you choosc the monaslic life foryourself?
Consider why you lefl. Did lhe head ofyour monastery
choose you for a parliclllarly imporlant mission beyond
the cloisler? Perhaps you \Verecasl out because of
some violalion of lhe communily's rules. Didyou dread
leaving, or were you happy lo go? ls Ihere somelhing
you hope lo accomplish oulside lhe monastery? Are you
eager lo relum toyour home?As a result ofthe structured life ofa monastic
community and the discipline required lOhamess ki,
monks are almosl always lawful in alignmenl.
QUICK BUILD
Voucan make a monk quickly byfollowing lhese
suggestions. First, make Dexlerily your highesl
ability score, followed byWisdom. Second, choose the
hermit background.
CLASS FEATURES
As a monk, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS
Hil Dice: Id8 per monk levei
Hil Poinls aI Is1 Levei: 8 +your Conslilution modifier
Hil Points aI Higher LeveIs: Id8 (or 5) +your
Constitution modifier per monk levei afler IsI
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: None
Weapons: Simple weapons, shortswords
Tools: Choose one type ofarlisan's lools or one
musical inslrumenl
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills: Choose two from Acrobatics, Athletics, History,
lnsight, Religion, and Stealth
EQUIPMENT
Voustart with lhe following equipment, in addilion lo
the equipment granled byyour background:
(a)a shortsword or (b)any simple weapon
(a)a dungeoneer's pack or (b)an explorer's pack
10darts
PART 1 CL"':)SES77
UNARMORED DEFENSE
Beginning at 1stleveI,while you are wearing noarmor
and not wielding ashield, your ACequals 10 +your
Dexterity modifier +your Wisdom modifier.
MARTIAL ARTS
At 1stleveI,your practice ofmartial arts givesyou
mastery ofcombat styles that use unarmed strikes and
monk weapons, which are shortswords and anysimple
melee weapons that don't have the two-handed or
heavy property.
Yougain the folIowing benefits while you are unarmed
orwielding only monk weapons and you aren't wearing
armor or wielding ashield:
Youcan use Dexterity instead ofStrength forthe
attack and damage rolIs ofyour unarmed strikes and
monk weapons.
Voucan rolIad4 inplace ofthe normal damage
ofyour unarmed strike or monk weapon. This die
changes as you gain monk leveis, as shown inthe
Martial Arts column ofthe Monk table.
When you use the Attack action with an unarmed
strikc oramonk weapon onyour turnoyou can make
one unarmed strike as abonus action. For example, if
you take the Attack action and attack with aquarter-
staff,you can also make an unarmed strike as abonus
action, assuming you haven't already taken abonus
action this turn,
Certain monasteries use specialized forms ofthe
monk weapons. For example, you might use acluh
that istwo lengths ofwood connected bya short chain
(calIed anunchaku) orasickle with ashorter, straighter
blade (called akama), Whatever name you use fora
monk weapon. you can use the game statistics provided
forthe weapon inchapter 5.
KI
Starting at 2nd levei,your training alIows you to
harness the mystic energy ofki.Youraccess tothis
energy isrepresented bya number ofkipoints. Your
monk leveidetermines the number ofpoints you have,
as shown inthe KiPoints column ofthe Monk table,
Youcan spend these points tofuelvarious kifeatures.
Youstart knowing three such features: Flurry ofBlows,
Patient Defcnse, and Step ofthe Wind, Youlearn more
kifeatures as you gain leveis inthis class,
When you spend akipoinl. itisunavailable until
you finish ashort or long rest, at the end ofwhich you
draw alIofyour expended kiback intoyourself. Vou
must spend at least 30 minutes ofthe rest meditating to
regainyour kipoints,
Some ofyour kifeatures require your target tomake
asaving throw toresist the feature's effects. The saving
throw DCiscalculated as folIows:
Ki saveDe=8+your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
PART IICLASSESFLURRY OF BLOWS
Immediately after you take the Attack action onyour
turn, you can spend I kipoint tomake two unarmed
strikes as abonus action.
PATIENT DEFENSE
Voucan spend I kipoint totake the Dodge action as a
bonus action onyour turno
STEP OFTHE WIND
Voucan spend I kipoint totake the Disengage or Dash
action as abonus action onyour turn, and your jump
distance isdoubled forthe turno
UNARMORED MOVEMENT
Starting at 2nd levei,your speed increases by 10feet
while you are not wearing armor or wielding ashield.
This bonus increases when you reach certain monk
leveis, as shown inthe Monk table.
At9th levei,you gain the ability tomove along vertical
surfaces and across liquids onyour turn without falIing
during the move,
MONASTIC TRADITION
When you reach 3rd levei,you commit yourself toa
monastic tradition: the Wayofthe Open Hand, the Way
ofShadow, or the Wayofthe Four Elements, alIdetailed
at the cnd ofthe class description. Yourtradition
grants you features at 3rd leveiand again at 6th, 11th,
and 17thleveI.
DEFLECT MISSILES
Starting at 3rd leveI,you can use your reaction to
deflect or catch the missile when youare hit byaranged
weapon attack. When you doso, the damage you take
from the attack isreduced by IdlO +your Dexterity
modifier+your monk leveI.
Ifyou reduce the damage toO,you can catch the
missile ifitissmalI enough foryou tohold inone hand
and you have at least one hand free, Ifyou catch a
missile inthis way,you can spend I kipoint tomake a
ranged attack with the weapon or piece ofammunition
youjust caught, as part ofthe same reaction. Voumake
this attack with proficiency, regardless ofyour weapon
proficiencies, and the missile counts as amonk weapon
forthe attack.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI.you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by2,oryou can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature,
SLOW FALL
Beginning at 4th levei,youcan use your reaction when
you falItoreduce any falIing damage you take byan
amount equal tofivetimes your monk leveI.
EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI,you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action onyour turno
STUNNING STRIKE
Starting at 5th leveI,you can interfere with the flowof
ki in an opponent's body. When you hit another creature
with a melee weapon attack. you can spend 1ki point to
attempt a stunning strike. The target must succeed on a
Constitution saving throw or be stunned until the end of
YOllrnext turno
KI-EMPOWERED STRIKES
Starting at 6th leveI,your unarmed strikes count as
magical for the purpose ofovercoming resistance and
immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage.
EVASION
At7th leveI,YOllrinstinctive agility lets you dodge
out ofthe way ofcertain area effects, such as a blue
dragon's Iightning breath or a firebalJspell. When YOll
are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a
Dextcrity saving throw to take only half damage, you
instead take no damage ifyou succeed on the saving
throw, and only half damage ifyou fail.
STILLNESS OF MIND
Starting at 7th leveI,you can use your action toend one
effect on yourself that iscausing YOllto be charmed
or frightened.
PURITY OF BODY
At 10th leveI,your mastery ofthe ki flowing throllgh you
makes you immune to disease and poison.
TONGUE OF THE SUN AND MOON
Starting at 13th leveI,you learn to touch the kiofother
minds so that you understand ali spoken languages.
Moreover, any creature that can understand a langllage
can understand what you say.
DIAMOND SOUL
Beginning at 14th leveI,your mastery ofki grants you
proficiency in ali saving throws.
Additionally, whenever YOllmake a saving throw and
fail,you can spend I ki point to reroll itand take the
second result.
TIMELESS BODY
At 15th leveI,your kisustains you so that you suffer
none ofthe frailty ofold age, and you can't be aged
magically. Voucan still die ofold age, however. In
addition, you no longer need food or water.
EMPTY BODY
Beginning at 18th leveI.you can use YOllraction to
spend 4 ki points to become invisible for 1minute.During that time, YOllalso have resistance to ali damage
but force damage.
Additionally, you can spend 8 ki points to cast the
astral projection spell, withollt needing material
components. When you do so.YOllcan't take any other
creatures with YOll.
PERFECT SELF
At20th leveI,when you roll for initiative and have no ki
points remaining, you regain 4 ki points.
MONASTIC TRADITIONS
Three traditions ofmonastic pllrsuit are common in
the monasteries scattered across the multiverse. Most
monasteries practice one tradition exclusively, bllt a
fewhonor the three traditions and instruct each monk
according to his or her aptitude and interest. Alithree
traditions rely on the same basic techniques. diverging
as the stlldent grows more adept. ThllS, a monk need
choose a tradition only upon reaching 3rd leveI.
WAYOFTHE OPEN HAND
Monks ofthe Wayofthe Open Hand are the lIltimate
masters ofmartial arts combat, whether armed or
unarmed. They learn techniqlles to pllsh and trip their
opponents, manipulate ki to heal damage to their
bodies, and practice advanced meditation that can
protect them from harm.
OPEN HAND TECHNIQUE
Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd leveI,
you can manipulate your enemy's kiwhen you harness
your own. Whenever you hit a creature with one ofthe
altacks granted byyour Flurry ofBlows, YOllcan impose
one ofthe following effects on that target:
Itmust succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be
knocked prone.
Itmust make a Strength saving throw. Iritfails, you
can push itup to 15feet away from YOll.
Itcan't take reactions until the end ofyour next turno
WHOLENESS OF BODY
At6th leveI,you gain the ability to heal YOllrself.As an
action, you can regain hit points equal to three times
PART 1 CLASSES
$PELLS ANO KI POINTSWAY OF THE FOUR ELEMENTSOPPORTUNIST
AI 171hleveI.you can exploil a crealure's momenlary
dislraclion when il is hil byan altack. Whenever a
creature wilhin 5 feel ofyou is hit byan allack made by
a crealure olher lhan you, you can use your reaclion to
make a melee atlack against lhal creature.
Vou follow a monastic lradilion that teaches you to
harness lhe elemenls. When you focus your ki, you can
align yourself with lhe forces of creation and bend lhe
four elements lo your will, using lhem as an exlension
ofyour body, Some members oflhis lradition dedicale
lhemselves to a single elemenl, but others weave lhe
elements logelher.
Many monks of lhis lradition lalloo lheir bodies wilh
represenlalions of lheir ki powers. commonly imagined
as coiling dragons. bul also as phoenixes, fish. planls,
mounlains. and cresling waves.
Maximum KiPoints for a Spell
3
4
5
6Monk Leveis
5th-8th
9th-12th
13th-16th
17th-201hDISCIPLE OF THE ELEMENTS
When you choose lhis lradilion ai 3rd levei, you learn
magical disciplines lhal harness lhe power of lhe four
elemenls. Adiscipline requires you lo spend ki points
each time you use it.
Vouknow lhe Elemenlal Allunemenl discipline and
one olher elemenlal discipline ofyour choice, which are
delailed in lhe "Elemental Disciplines" seclion below.
Voulearn one addilional elemental discipline ofyour
choice ai 61h, 111h.and 17th leveI.
Whenever you learn a new elemenlal discipline,
you can also replace one elemenlal discipline lhal you
already know wilh a different discipline.
Casting Elemental Spells. Some elemenlal
disciplines allow you to casl spells. See chapter 10for
lhe general rules of spellcasling. To cast one of lhese
spells, you use ils casting time and olher rules. but you
don'l need lo provide malerial componenls for it.
Once you reach 51hlevei in lhis class. you can spend
additional ki poinls lo increase the levei of an elemenlal
discipline spelllhal you cas!, provided lhallhe spell has
an enhanced effecl at a higher levei. as burning hands
does. The spell's leveI increases by 1for each addilional
ki poinl you spend. For example, ifyou are a 5th-levei
monk and use Sweeping Cinder Slrike lo casl burning
hands,you can spend 3 ki poinls lo casl itas a 2nd-levei
spell (lhe discipline's base cosi of 2 ki poinls plus I).
The maximum number of ki poinls you can spend lo
casl a spell in lhis Way(including ils base ki point cosi
and any addilional ki poinls you spend lOincrease its
levei) is delermined byyour monk levei. as shown in lhe
Spells and Ki Poinls table.Monks of the Way of Shadow follow a lradilion lhal
values sleallh and sublerfuge. These monks might
be called ninjas or shadowdancers. and they serve as
spies and assassins. Somelimes the members ofa
ninja monaslery are family members, forming a clan
sworn to secrecy about their arts and missions. Olher
monasleries are more like lhieves' guilds, hiring oul
their services lo nobles, rich merchanls, or anyone else
who can pay lheir fees. Regardless of their melhods, lhe
heads of lhese monasleries expect lhe unqueslioning
obedience of lheir sludenls.
SHADOW ARTS
Slarling when you choose this tradition ai 3rd levei.you
can use your ki lo duplicate lhe effecls of certain spells.
As an action. you can spend 2 ki poinls lo casl darkness,
darkvision. pass without trace, orsi/ence.wilhoul
providing malerial components. Addilionally. you gain
lheminor iJlusion canlrip ifyou don'l already know it.
CLOAK OF SHADOWS
By 111hleveI,you have learned lo become one wilh
lhe shadows. When you are in an area ofdim lighl or
darkness, you can use your aclion lo become invisible.
Vouremain invisible until you make an altack. casl a
spell.orare in an area of brighl light.QUIVERING PALM
AI 171hlevei.you gain lhe ability lo sei up lelhal
vibrations in someone's body. When you hil a crealure
with an unarmed slrike. you can spend 3 ki points to
slart these imperceplible vibralions. which lasl for a
number ofdays equallo your monk leveI. The vibralions
are harmless unless you use your action lo end lhem.
To do so. you and lhe largel musl be on lhe same plane
ofexislence. When you use lhis aclion. lhe crealure
musl make a Conslilulion saving throw. Ifit fails. it is
reduced to Ohil poinls. Ifil succeeds, illakes IOdlO
necrotic damage.
Voucan have only one creature under lhe effecl of lhis
fealure ai a lime. Voucan choose lo end the vibrations
harmlessly wilhout using an aclion.
WAY OF SHADOW
SHADOW STEP
AI61h levei.you gain lhe abilily lo slep from one shadow
into anolher. When you are in dim Iighl or darkness.
as a bonus aclion you can leleporl up to 60 feel to an
unoccupied space you can see that is also in dim lighl
or darkness. Voulhen have advanlage on lhe firsl melee
altack you make before the end of the lurn.TRANQUILlTY
Beginning ai 111hlevei.you can enler a special
medilalion lhal surrounds you wilh an aura of peace. AI
lhe end ofa long resl. you gain lhe effecl of a sanctuary
spelllhal lasls unlillhe slarl ofyour nexllong resl (lhe
spell can end early as normal). The saving lhrow DC
for lhe spell equals 8 +your Wisdom modifier +your
proficieney bonus.your monk leveI. Vou musl finish a long resl before you
can use lhis fealure again.
80PART IICLASSES
••ELEMENTAL DISCIPLINES
The elemental disciplines are presented in alphabetical
arder. ]fa discipline requires a leveI,you must be that
leveIin this class tolearn the discipline.
Breath ofWinter (17th LeveI Required). Voucan
spend 6 ki points tocast cone of cold.
Clench ofthe North Wind (6th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 3ki points to cast hold person.
Elemental Attunement. Voucan use your action to
brie!ly control elemental forces nearby, causing one of
the fol!owing effects ofyour choice:
Create a harmless, instantaneous sensory effect
related to air, earth, fire, or water, such as a shower of
sparks, a puff ofwind, a spray oflight mist, or a gentle
rumbling ofstone.
Instantaneously light ar snuff out a candIe, a torch, ar
a smal! campfire.
Chill or warm up to I pound ofnonliving material for
up to I hour.
Cause earth, fire, water, or mist that can fitwithin a
I-foot cube toshape itself into a crude form you desig-
nate for I minute.
Eternal Mountain Defense (11th LeveI Required).
Voucan spend 5ki points to cast stoneskin,
targeting yourself.
Fangs ofthe Fire Snake. When you use the Atlack
action on your turn, you can spend I ki point tocause
tendrils of!lame tostretch out from your fists and feel.
Your reach with your unarmed strikes increases by
10feet for that action, as wel! as the rest ofthe turn.
Ahit with such an attack deals fire damage instead of
bludgeoning damage, and ifyou spend I ki point when
the attack hits, italso deals an extra IdlO fire damage.
Fist ofFour Thunders. Voucan spend 2 kipoints to
castthunderwave.
Fist ofUnbroken Air. Voucan create a blast of
compressed air that strikes like a mighty fisl.As an
action, you can spend 2 ki points and choose a creature
within 30 feet of YOU.That creature must make a
Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
takes 3dl0 bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO
bludgeoning damage foreach additional kipoint you
spend, and you can push the creature up to 20 feet away
from you and knock itprone. On a successful save, the
creature takes half as much damage, and you don't push
itor knock itprone.
Flames ofthe Phoenix (11th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 4 ki points to cast fireball.
Gong ofthe Summit (6th LeveI Required). Voucan
spend 3 ki points tocast shatter.
Mist Stance (11thLeveI Required). Voucan spend 4
ki points to cast gaseous form,targeting yourself.
Ride the Wind (11th LeveI Required). Voucan spend
4 ki points to cast fiy,targeting yourself.
RiverofHungry Flame (17thLeveI Required). Vou
can spend 5ki points tocast wall of fire.
Rush ofthe Gale Spirits. Voucan spend 2 ki points
to castgust of wind.Shape the Flowing River. As an action, you can
spend I ki point to choose an area ofice or water no
larger than 30 feet on a side within 120 feet of YOU.Vou
can change water to icewithin the area and vice versa,
and you can reshape ice in the area in any manner you
choose. Voucan raise or lower the ice's elevation, create
ar fil!in a trench, erect or !latten awal!, or form a pil!ar.
The extent ofany such changes can't exceed half the
area's largest dimensiono For example, ifyou affect a
30-foot square, you can create a pillar up to 15feet high,
raise or lower the square's elevation byup to 15feet, dig
a trench up to 15feet deep, and so on. Voucan't shape
the ice to trap or injure a creature in the area.
Sweeping Cinder Strike. Voucan spend 2ki points to
castburning hands.
Water Whip. Voucan spend 2 kipoints as a bonus
action tocreate a whip ofwater that shoves and pul!s
acreature to unbalance lI.Acreature that you can see
that iswithin 30 feet ofyou must make a Dexterity
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d10
bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO bludgeoning
damage foreach additional ki point you spend, and you
can either knock itprone or pul! itup to 25 feet closer
toYOU.On a successful save, the creature takes half as
much damage, and you don't pul! Itor knock itprone.
Wave ofRolling Earth (17th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 6 ki points to cast wall of stone.
••
MONASTIC ORDERS
lhe worlds of D&Dcontain a multitude of monasteries
and monastic traditions. In lands with an Asian cultural
flavor,such as Shou Lung farto the east ofthe Forgotten
Realms, these monasteries are associated with philosophical
traditions and martial arts practice. lhe Iron Hand School,
the FiveStars School, the Northern Fist School, and
the Southern Star School ofShou Lungteach different
approaches to the physical, mental, and spiritual disciplines
ofthe monk. Some ofthese monasteries have spread to the
western lands of FaerOn,particularly in places with large
Shou immigrant communities. such as lhesk and Westgate.
Other monastic traditions are associated with deities who
teach the value of physical excellence and mental discipline.
Inthe Forgotten Realms, the order ofthe Dark Moon is
made up of monks dedicated to Shar (goddess of loss), who
maintain secret communities in remote hills, back allies,
and subterranean hideaways. Monasteries of IImater (god
ofendurance) are named after flowers, and their orders
carry the names ofgreat heroes ofthe faith; the Disciples of
Saint Sollars the lwice-Martyred reside inthe Monastery of
the YellowRose near Damara. lhe monasteries of Eberron
combine the study of martial arts with a lifeof scholarship.
Most are devoted to the deities ofthe Sovereign Hosl.
Inthe world of Dragonlance, most monks are devoted to
Majere, god of meditation and thoughl. InGreyhawk, many
monasteries are dedicated to XanYae,the goddess oftwilight
and the superiority of mind over matter, or to Zuoken, god of
mental and physical mastery.
lhe evilmonks ofthe Scarlet Brotherhood in the world of
Greyhawk derive their fanatic zeal not from devotion to a god
but from dedication to the principies oftheir nation and their
race-the belief that the Suei strand of humanity are meant
to rule the world...••....-------------------- ..-
PART 1 ICLASSES81
PART I ICLASSESPALADIN
Clad inplate armor that gleams inthe sunlight despite
the dust and grime oflong travei, a human laysdown
her sword and shield and places her hands on a mortally
wounded manoDivine radiance shines from her hands,
the man's wounds knit closed, and his eyes open wide
with amazement.
Adwarf crouches behind an outcrop, his black cloak
making him nearly invisible inthe night, and watches
an orc war band celebrating its recent victory.Silently,
he stalks into their midst and whispers an oath, and two
orcs are dead before they even realize he is there.
Silver hair shining in ashaft of!ightthat seems to
illuminate onlyhim, an elflaughs with exultation. His
spear flashes like his eyes as hejabs again and again
at a twisted giant, until at last his light overcomes its
hideous darkness.
Whatever their origin and their mission, paladins are
united bytheir oaths tostand against the forces ofevil.
Whether sworn before a god's altar and the witness of
a priest, in asacred glade before nature spirits and fey
beings, or ina moment ofdesperation and griefwith the
dead as the onlywitness, a paladin's oath is a powerful
bond. lt is asource ofpower that turns a devout warrior
into a blessed champion.
THE CAUSE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS
Apaladin swears to upholdjustice and righteousness,
tostand with the good things ofthe world against the
encroaching darkness, and tohunt the forces ofevil
wherever they lurk. Different paladins focus onvarious
aspects ofthe cause ofrighteousness, but all are
bound bythe oaths that grant them power todotheir
sacred work. Although many paladins are devoted to
gods ofgood, a paladin's power comes as much from a
commitment tojustice itself as itdoes from a god.
Paladins train foryears tolearn the skills ofcombat,
mastering avariety ofweapons and armor. Evenso,
their martial skills are secondary tothe magical power
they wield:power toheal the sick and injured, tosmite
the wicked and the undead, and toprotect the innocent
and those whojoin them in the fightforjustice.
BEYOND THE MUNDANE LIFE
Almost bydefinition, the !ifeofa paladin is an
adventuring !ife.Unless a lasting injury has taken him
ar her awayfrom adventuring fora time, every paladin
!iveson the front !ines ofthe cosmic struggle against
QUICK BUILD
Voucan make a paIadin quickly byfollowing these
suggestions. First, Strength should be your highest
ability score, followed byCharisma. Second, choose the
noble background.as Torm, Tyr,Heironeous,
Paladine, Kiri-Jolith, DoI
Arrah, the Silver Flame,
Bahamut, Athena, Re-Horakhty,
and Heimdall.
How did you experience your call to
serve as a paladin? Didyou hear a whisper
from an unseen god or angel while you were at
prayer? Did another paladin sense the potentia! within
you and decide to train you as a squire? Or did some
terrible event-the destruction ofyour home, perhaps-
drive you toyour quests? Perhaps you stumbled into
a sacred grove or a hidden eIven enclave and found
yourself called to protect ali such refuges ofgoodness
and beauty. Or you might have known from your earliest
memories that the paladin's lifewas your calling, almost
as ifyou had been sent into the world with that purpose
stamped on your soul.
As guardians against the forces ofwickedness,
paladins are rarely ofany evil alignment. Most of them
walk the paths ofcharity and justice. Consider how your
alignment colors the way you pursue your holy quest
and the manner in which you conduct yourself before
gods and mortaIs. Your oath and alignment might be
in harmony, or your oath might represent standards of
behavior that you have not yet attained.Proficiency-Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Bonus Features 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
1st +2 Divine Sense, Lay on Hands
2nd +2 Fighting Style, Spellcasting, Divine Smite 2
3rd +2 Divine Health, Sacred Oath 3
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 3
5th +3 Extra Allack 4 2
6th +3 Aura of Protection 4 2
7th +3 Sacred Oath feature 4 3
8th +3 Ability Score Improvement 4 3
9th +4 4 3 2
10th +4 Aura of Courage 4 3 2
11th +4 Improved Divine Smite 4 3 3
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 3 3
13th +5 4 3 3
14th +5 Cleansing Touch 4 3 3
15th +5 Sacred Oath feature 4 3 3
16th +5 Ability Score Improvement 4 3 3
17th +6 4 3 3
18th +6 Aura improvements 4 3 3
19th +6 Ability Score Improvement 4 3 3
20th +6 Sacred Oath feature 4 3 3
evil. Fighters are rare enough among the ranks ofthe
militias and armies ofthe world, but even fewer people
can c1aim the true calling ofa paladin. When they do
receive the call, these warriors turn from their former
occupations and take up arms to fight evil. Sometimes
their oaths lead them into the service ofthe crown as
leaders ofelite groups ofknights, but even then their
loyalty is first to the cause ofrighteousness, not to
crown and country.
Adventuring paladins take their work seriously. A
delve into an ancient ruin or dusty crypt can be a quest
driven bya higher purpose than the acquisition of
treasure. Evillurks in dungeons and primeval forests,
and even the smallest victory against itcan tilt the
cosmic balance away from oblivion.
CREATING A PALADIN
The most important aspect ofa paladin character is
the nature of his or her holy quest. Although the c1ass
features related toyour oath don't appear until you
reach 3rd levei, plan ahead for that choice byreading
the oath descriptions at the end ofthe c1ass. Are you a
devoted servant ofgood. loyal to the gods ofjustice and
honor, a holy knight in shining armor venturing forth
to smite evil? Are you a glorious champion ofthe light,
cherishing everything beautiful that stands against the
shadow, a knight whose oath descends from traditions
older than many ofthe gods? Or are you an embittered
loner sworn to take vengeance on those who have done
great evil, sent as an angel ofdeath bythe gods or driven
byyour need for revenge? Appendix Blists many deities
worshiped bypaladins throughout the multiverse, such
PART I I CUSSES
CLASS FEATURES
Asa paladin, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: ldl0 per paladin leveI
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 10+your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: ldlO (or6)+your
Constitution modifier per paladin level after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Aliarmor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from Athletics, Insight, Intimidation,
Medicine, Persuasion, and Religion
EQUIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, inaddition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)a martial weapon and ashield or (b)two martial
weapons
(a)fivejavelins or (b)any simpIemelee weapon
(a)a priest's pack or (b)an explorer's pack
Chain mail and a holysymbol
DIVINE SENSE
The presence ofstrong evil registers onyour senses like
a noxious odor, and powerful good rings like heavenly
music inyour ears. Asan action, you can open your
awareness to detect such forces. Until the end ofyour
next turn, you know the location ofany celestial, fiend,
or undead within 60 feet ofyou that is not behind total
cover. Vouknow the type (celestial, fiend, or undead) of
any being whose presence you sense, but not its identity
(the vampire Count Strahd von Zarovich, forinstance).
Within the same radius, you also detect the presence
ofany place or object that has been consecrated or
desecrated, as with the hallowspell.
Voucan use this feature a number oftimes equal to
1+your Charisma modifier. When you finish along rest,
you regain ali expended uses.
LAY ON HANDS
Yourblessed touch can heal wounds. Vouhave apool
ofhealing power that replenishes when you take along
rest. With that pool, you can restore atotal number of
hit points equal toyour paladin leveIx5.
As an action, you can touch acreature and draw
power from the pool torestore anumber ofhit points
tothat creature, up tothe maximum amount remaining
inyour pool.
Alternatively, you can expend 5hit points from your
pool ofhealing tocure the target ofone disease or
neutralize one poison affecting it.Voucan cure multipIe
diseases and neutralize multipIepoisons with asingle
use ofLayon Hands, expending hit points separately
foreach one.
This feature has noeffect on undead and constructs.
PART 1 ICLASSESFIGHTING STYLE
At2nd leveI,you adopt astyle offighting as your
specialty. Choose one ofthe following options. Voucan't
take a Fighting Style option more than once, even ifyou
later get tochoose again.
DEFENSE
While youare wearing armor, yougain a+1bonus toAC.
DUELING
When you are wielding amelee weapon inone hand and
no other weapons, you gain a+2 bonus todamage rolls
with that weapon.
GREAT WEAPON FIGHTING
When you roll a 1or 2on adamage die for an attack you
make with amelee weapon that you are wielding with
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new
roll. The weapon must have the two-handed or versatile
property foryou togain this benefit.
PROTECTION
When acreature you can see attacks a target other
than you that iswithin 5feet ofyou,you can use your
reaction toimpose disadvantage on the attack roll.
Voumust be wielding ashield.
SPELLCASTING
By2nd levei,you have learned todraw on divine
magic through meditation and prayer tocast spells as
acleric does. See chapter 10for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11for the paladin spell listo
PREPARING AND CASTING SPELLS
The Paladin table shows how many spell slots you have
tocast your spells. Tocast one ofyour paladin spells of
1st leveIor higher, you must expend aslot ofthe spell's
leveIor higher. Vouregain ali expended spell slots when
you finish along resto
Vouprepare the list ofpaladin spells that are available
foryou tocast, choosing from the paladin spelllist.
When you doso, choose a number ofpaladin spells
equal toyour Charisma modifier +half your paladin
leveI,rounded down (minimum ofone spell). The spells
must be ofaleveIforwhich you have spell slots.
For example, ifyou are a 5th-leveI paladin, you have
four 1st-leveIand two 2nd-leveI spell slots. With a
Charisma of 14,your list ofprepared spells can include
four spells of 1stor 2nd levei, inany combination. Ifyou
prepare the 1st-levei spell cure wounds, you can cast
itusing a 1st-leveIor a 2nd-leveI slot. Casting the spell
doesn't remove itfrom your list ofprepared spells.
Voucan change your list ofprepared spells when you
finish along rest. Preparing anew list ofpaladin spells
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least I
minute per spelllevel for each spell onyour list.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Charisma isyour spellcasting ability foryour paladin
spells, since their power derives from the strength of
your convictions. Vouuse your Charisma whenever a
spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you
use your Charisma modifier when setting the saving
throw DC for a paladin spell you cast and when making
an attack roll with one.
Spell saveDe ~8+your proficiency bonus +
your (harisma modifier
Spell attack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your (harisma modifier
SPELLCASTING Focus
Voucan use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus for your paladin spells.
DIVINE SMITE
Starting at 2nd leveI, when you hit a creature with a
melee weapon attack, you can expend one paladin spell
slot to deal radiant damage to the target, in addition to
the weapon's damage. The extra damage is 2d8 for a
1st-levei spell slot, plus ld8 for each spelllevel higher
than 1st, to a maximum of 5d8. The damage increases
by ld8 if the target is an undead or a fiend.
DIVINE HEALTH
By 3rd levei, the divine magic flowing through you
makes you immune to disease.
SACRED OATH
When you reach 3rd leveI, you swear the oath that binds
you as a paladin forever. Up to this time you have been
in a preparatory stage, committed to the path but not
yet sworn to it. Now you choose the Oath of Devotion,
the Oath of the Ancients, ar the Oath ofVengeance, all
detailed at the end of the c1ass description.
Your choice grants you features at 3rd leveI and again
at 7th, 15th, and 20th leveI. Those features include oath
spells and the Channel Divinity feature.
OATH SPELLS
Each oath has a list ofassociated spells. Vougain
access to these spells at the leveIs specified in the oath
description. Once you gain access to an oath spell, you
always have it prepared. Oath spells don't count against
the number of spells you can prepare each day.
Ifyou gain an oath spell that doesn't appear on the
paladin spelllist, the spell is nonetheless a paladin
spell foryou.
CHANNEL DIVINITY
Your oath allows you to channel divine energy to fuel
magical effects. Each ChanneI Divinity option provided
byyour oath explains how to use it.
When you use your ChanneI Divinity, you choose
which option to use. Voumust then finish a short ar long
rest to use your Channel Divinity again.
Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws.
When you use such an effect from this c1ass, the DC
equals your paladin spell save De.ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th leveI, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI,you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by 2, ar you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI,you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno
AURA OF PROTECTION
Starting at 6th leveI, whenever you ar a friendly creature
within 10feet ofyou must make a saving throw, the
creature gains a bonus to the saving throw equal to your
Charisma modifier (with a minimum bonus of+1).Vou
must be conscious to grant this bonus.
At 18th levei, the range ofthis aura increases to 30 feet.
AURA OF COURAGE
Starting at 10th leveI.you and friendly creatures
within 10feet ofyou can't be frightened while you
are conscious.
At 18th levei, the range ofthis aura increases to 30 feet.
IMPROVED DIVINE SMITE
By 11th leveI,you are so suffused with righteous
rnight that ali your melee weapon strikes carry divine
power with them. Whenever you hit a creature with a
meIee weapon, the creature takes an extra ld8 radiant
damage. lfyou also use your Divine Smite with an
attack, you add this damage to the extra damage ofyour
Divine Smite.
CLEANSING TOUCH
Beginning at 14th leveI,you can use your action to
end one spell on yourself ar on one willing creature
that you touch.
Voucan use this feature a number oftimes equal
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). Vou
regain expended uses when you finish a long rest.
SACRED OATHS
Becorning a paladin invoIves taking vows that commit
the paladin to the cause of righteousness, an active
path offighting wickedness. The final oath, taken
when he ar she reaches 3rd levei, is the culmination
of ali the paladin's training. Some characters with this
c1ass don't consider themselves true paladins until
they have reached 3rd levei and made this oath. For
others, the actual swearing of the oath is a formality,
an official stamp on what has always been true in the
paladin's heart.
OATH OF DEVOTION
The Oath of Devotion binds a paladin to the loftiest
ideaIs ofjustice, virtue, and arder. Sometimes called
cavaliers, white knights. ar holy warriors, these
paladins meet the ideal of the knight in shining armar.
PAR1 IICLASSES
PURITY OF SPIRIT
Beginning at 15th levei,you are always under the effects
ofaprotection {rom eviJand gaad spell.reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from
moving. Ifthere's nowhere to move, the creature can use
the Dodge action.
AURA OF DEVOTION
Starting at 7th levei,you and friendly creatures within
10feet ofyou can't be charmed while you are conscious.
At 18th leveI,the range ofthis aura increases to 30 feet.••
,.4
BREAKING YOUR OATH
A paladin tries to hold to the highest standards of conduct,
but even the most virtuous paladin is fallible. Sometimes
the right path proves toa demanding, sometimes a situation
calls for the lesser of two evils, and sometimes the heat of
emotion causes a paladin to transgress his ar her oath.
A paladin who has broken a vow typically seeks absolution
frama eleric who shares his ar her faith ar from another
paladin of the same arder. The paladin might spend an ali.
night vigil in prayer as a sign of penitence, ar undertake a
fast ar similar act of self.denia!. After a rite of confession and
forgiveness, the paladin starts fresh.
If a paladin willfully violates his ar her oath and shows no
sign of repentance, the consequences can be more serious.
At the DM's discretion, an impenitent paladin might be
forced to abandon this elass and adopt another, ar perhaps
to take the Oathbreaker paladin option that appears in the
Dungeon Master'sCuide.••
OATH OF DEVOTION SPELLSTENETS OF DEVOTION
Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of
Devotion vary, paladins ofthis oath share these tenets.
Honesty. Don't lie or cheat. Let your word be
your promise.
Coural1e. Never fear to act, though caution is wise.
Compassion. Aid others, protect the weak, and
punish those who threaten them. Show mercy toyour
foes, but temper itwith wisdom.
Honor. Treat others with fairness, and let your
honorable deeds be an example to them. Do as
much good as possible while causing the least
amount ofharm.
Duty.Be responsible foryour actions and their
consequences, protect those entrusted toyour care,
and obey those who havejust authority over you.acting with honor in pursuit ofjustice and the greater
good. They hold themselves to the highest standards of
conduct, and some, for better or worse, hold the rest of
the world to the same standards. Manywho swear this
oath are devoted to gods oflaw and good and use their
gods' tenets as the measure oftheir devotion. They hold
angels-the perfect servants ofgood-as their ideaIs,
and incorporate images ofangelic wings into their
helmets or coats ofarms.
OATH SPELLS
Vougain oath spells at the paladin leveIslisted.
Paladin Levei Spells
3rdprotectionfrom evilandgood,sanctuary
5thlesserrestoration, zone oftruth
9thbeacon ofhope, dispelmagic
13thfreedom ofmovement, guardian offaith
17thcommune,jlame strike
CHANNEL DIVINITY
When you take this oath at 3rd levei,you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options.
Sacred Weapon. As an action, you can imbue one
weapon that you are holding with positive energy,
using your Channel Divinity.For I minute, you add
your Charisma modifier to attack rolls made with that
weapon (with a minimum bonus of+1).The weapon also
emits bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light 20
feel beyond that. 1fthe weapon is not already magical, it
becomes magical for the duration.
Voucan end this effect on your turn as part ofany
other action. 1fyou are no longer holding or carrying
this weapon, or ifyou fali unconscious, this effect ends.
Turn the Unholy. As an action, you present your
holysymbol and speak a prayer censuring fiends and
undead, using your Channel Divinity. Each fiend or
undead that can see or hear you within 30 feet ofyou
must make a Wisdom saving throw. 1fthe creature
fails its saving throw, it is turned for I minute or until
it takes damage.
Aturned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly
move to a space within 30 feet ofyou. Italso can't takeHOLY NIMBUS
At 20th levei,as an action, you can emanate an aura of
sunlight. For I minute, bright light shines from yau in a
30-foot radius, and dim light shines 30 feet beyond that.
Whenever an enemy creature starts its turo in the
bright light, the creature takes lOradiant damage.
In addition, for the duration, you have advantage on
saving throws against spells cast byfiends or undead.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long rest.
OATH OFTHE ANCIENTS
The Oath ofthe Ancients is as old as the race af elves
and the rituais of the druids. Sometimes called fey
knights, green knights, or horned knights, paladins who
swear this oath cast their lot with the side ofthe light
in the cosmic struggle against darkness because they
lovethe beautiful and life-giving things ofthe world,
natnecessarily because they believe in principIes of
hanor,caurage, and justice. They adorn their armor and
clothing with images ofgrowing things-Ieaves, antlers,
or flowers-to reflect their commitment to preserving
life and light in the world.
TENETS OF THE ANCIENTS
The tenets ofthe Oath ofthe Ancients have been
preserved for uncounted centuries. This oath
emphasizes the principies ofgood above any concerns
of law or chaos. Its faur central principies are simple.
86PART I ICLASSES
Kindle the Light. Through your acts ofmercy,
kindness, and forgiveness, kindle the light ofhope in the
world, beating back despair.
Shelter the Light. Where there is good, beauty, love,
and laughter in the world, stand against the wickedness
that would swallow il.Where lifefiourishes, stand
against the forces that would render itbarren.
Preserve Your OwnLight. Delight in song and
laughter, in beauty and arl. Ifyou allow the light todie in
your own heart, you can't preserve itin the world.
Be the Light. Be a glorious beacon forali who livein
despair. Let the light ofyour joy and courage shine forth
in aliyour deeds.
OATH SPELLS
Vougain oath spells at the paladin leveIs listed.
OATH OF THE ANCIENTS SPELLS
Paladin Levei Spells
3rdensnaring strike, speak with animais
5thmoonbeam, misty step
9thplant growth, protection from energy
13thice storm, stoneskin
17thcommune with nature, tree stride
CHANNEL DIVINITY
When you take this oath at 3rd leveI,you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options.
Nature's Wrath. Voucan use your Channel Divinity
to invoke primeval forces to ensnare a foe. As an action,
you can cause spectral vines tospring up and reach
for acreature within 10feet ofyou that you can see.
The creature must succeed on a Strength or Dexterity
saving throw (its choice) or be restrained. While
restrained bythe vines, the creature repeats the saving
throw at the end ofeach ofits turns. On a success, it
frees itself and the vines vanish.
Turn the Faithless. Voucan use your Channel
Divinity to utler ancient words that are painful forfey
and fiends tohear. As an action, you present your holysymbol, and each feyor fiend within 30 feet ofyou that
can hear you must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
failed save, the creature is turned for 1minute or until it
takes damage.
Aturned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as itcan, and itcan't willingly
move toa space within 30 feet ofyou. lt also can't take
reactions. For its action, itcan use only the Dash action
or try to escape fram an effect that prevents it from
moving. Ifthere's nowhere to move, the creature can use
the Dodge action.
Ifthe creature's true form is concealed byan illusion,
shapeshifting, or other effect, lhat form is revealed while
itis turned.
AURA OF WARDING
Beginning at 7th leveI,ancient magic lies so heavily
upon you that itforms an eldritch ward. Vouand friendly
creatures within 10feet ofyou have resistance to
damage from spells.
At 18th leveI,the range ofthis aura increases to 30 feel.
UNDYING SENTINEL
Starting at 15th leveI,when you are reduced to Ohit
points and are not killed oUlright, you can choose to
drop to 1hit point instead. Once you use this ability, you
can't use itagain until you finish a long resl.
Additionally, you suffer none ofthe drawbacks ofold
age, and you can't be aged magically.
ELDER CHAMPION
At20th levei,you can assume the form ofan ancient
force ofnature, taking on an appearance you choose.
For example, your skin might turn green or take on a
bark-like texture, your hair might become leafy or moss-
like, oryou might sprout antlers or a lion-like mane.
Using your action, you undergo a transformation.
For 1minute, you gain the following benefits:
Atthe start ofeach ofyour turns, you regain 10hit
points.
Whenever you cast a paladin spell that has a casting
time of 1action, you can cast itusing a bonus action
instead.
Enemy creatures within 10feet ofyou have disadvan-
tage on saving throws against your paladin spells and
Channel Divinity options.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a long resl.
OATHOFVENGEANCE
The Oath ofVengeance is a solemn commitment to
punish those who have commitled a grievous sinoWhen
evil forces slaughter helpless villagers, when an entire
people turns against the will ofthe gods. when a thieves'
guild grows toa violent and powerful, when a dragon
rampages through the countryside-at times like these,
paladins arise and swear an Oath ofVengeance toset
right that which has gone wrong. Tothese paladins-
sometimes called avengers or dark knights-their own
purity is not as important as delivering justice.
PART IICL~SSES
88TENETS OF VENGEANCE
The tenets ofthe Oath ofVengeanee vary bypaladin, but
ali the tenets revolve around punishing wrongdoers by
any means neeessary. Paladins who uphold these tenets
are willing tosaerifiee even their own righteousness to
mete outjustice upon those who do evil, so the paladins
are often neutral or lawful neutral inalignmen!. The
core principIes ofthe tenets are brutally simple.
Fight the Greater Evil. Faeed with a ehoice offighting
mysworn foes or eombating a Iesser evil, Iehoose the
greater evil.
NoMerey for the Wieked. Ordinary foes might win
my merey, but mysworn enemies do no!.
ByAny Means Neeessary. Myqualms ean't get in the
way ofexterminating myfoes.
Restitution. ]fmy foes wreak ruin on the world, itis
because Ifailed to stop them. Imust help those harmed
bytheir misdeeds.
OATH SPELLS
VOUgaln oath spells at the paladin leveis listed.
OATHOFVENGEANCE SPELLS
Paladin Levei Spells
3rdbane, hunter's mark
5thhold person, misty step
9th haste, protection from energy
13th banishment, dimension door
17th hold monster, scrying
PA RT 1 ICLASSESCHANNEL DIVINITY
When you take this oath at 3rd leveI,you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options.
Abjure Enemy. As an aetion, you present your holy
symbol and speak a prayer ofdenunciation, using your
ChanneI Divinlty. Choose one ereature within 60 feet
ofyou that you ean see. That ereature must make a
Wisdom saving throw, unless it isimmune to being
frightened. Fiends and undead have disadvantage on
this saving throw.
On a failed save, lhe ereature is frightened for I
minute or until Ittakes any damage. While frightened,
the ereature's speed is O,and Itean't benefit from any
bonus to its speed.
On a sueeessful save, the ereature's speed is halved
for I minute or until the ereature takes any damage.
VowofEnmity. As a bonus aetion, you ean utter a vow
ofenmity against a ereature you ean see within 10feet
ofyou, using your Channel Divinity. Vougain advantage
on attaek rolls against lhe ereature for 1minute or until
itdrops to Ohit points or falls uneonscious.
RELENTLESS AVENGER
By7th leveI,your supernatural foeus helps you dose
offa foe's retrea!. When you hit a ereature with an
opportunity attaek, you ean move up to half your
speed immediately after the attaek and as part of
the same reaetion. This movement doesn't provoke
opportunityattaeks.
Sou L OF VENGEANCE
Starting at 15th leveI,the authority with which you
speak your VowofEnmity gives you greater power over
your foe. When a ereature under the effeet ofyour Vow
ofEnmity makes an attaek, you ean use your reaetion to
make a melee weapon attaek against that ereature ifitis
within range.
AVENGING ANGEL
At20th leveI,you ean assume the form ofan
angelie avenger. Using your aetion, you undergo a
transformation. For I hour, you gain the following
benefits:
Wings sprout from your baek and grant you a fiying
speed of60 fee!.
Vouemanate an aura ofmenaee in a 30-foot radius.
The first time any enemy ereature enters the aura or
starts its turn there during a battle, the ereature must
sueeeed on a Wisdom saving throw or beeome fright-
ened ofyou for I minute or unti! it takes any damage.
Attaek rolls against the frightened ereature have
advantage.
Onee you use this feature, you ean't use itagain unti!
you finish a long resto
RANGER
Rough and wild looking,
a human stalks alone
thraugh the shadows of
trees, hunting the orcs he
knows are planning araid
on anearby farm, Clutching
ashortsword ineach hand,
he becomes awhirlwind of
steel, cutting down one enemy
after another.
After tumbling away from acone of
freezing air, an elffinds her feet and draws
back her bow toloose an arrow aIthe white
dragon. Shrugging offthe wave offear that emanates
from the dragon like the cold ofits breath, she sends
one arrow after another tofindthe gaps between the
dragon's thick scales.
Holding his hand high, ahalf-elf whistles tothe hawk
that circles high above him, calling the bird back tohis
side. Whispering instructions in Elvish, he points to
the owlbear he's been tracking and sends the hawk to
distract the creature while he readies his bow.
Far fram the bustle ofcities and towns, past the
hedges lhat shelter the most distant farms fram the
terrors ofthe wild, amid lhe dense-packed trees of
trackJess forests and across wide and empty plains,
rangers keep their unending watch.
DEADLY HUNTERS
Warriors ofthe wilderness, rangers specialize in
hunting the monsters that threaten the edges of
civilization-humanoid raiders, rampaging beasts and
monstrasities, terrible giants, and deadly dragons. They
learn totrack their quarry as a predator does, moving
stealthily thraugh the wilds and hiding lhemselves in
brush and rubble. Rangers focus their combat training
on techniques that are particularly useful against their
specific favored foes.
Thanks totheir familiarity with the wilds, rangers
acquire the ability tocast spells that harness nature's
power, much as adruid does. Their spells, like their
combat abilities, emphasize speed, stealth, and the hunt.
Aranger's talents and abilities are honed with deadly
focus on the grim task ofprotecting lhe borderlands.
INDEPENDENT ADVENTURERS
Though a ranger might make aliving as ahunter, a
guide, or atracker, aranger's true calling istodefend
the outskirts ofcivilization fram lhe ravages ofmonsters
and humanoid hordes lhat press in from the wild. In
some places, rangers gather insecretive orders orjoin
forces with druidic circles. Many rangers, though, are
independent almost toafault, knowing that, when a
dragon or a band oforcs attacks, aranger might be lhe
first-and possibly the last-line ofdefense.
This fierce independence makes rangers well suited
toadventuring, since they are accustomed tolife far
fram the comforts ofadry bed and a hot bath. Faced
with city-bred adventurers who grouse and whine about
the hardships ofthe wild, rangers respond with someI
p"RlII' SE89
What made youjoin up with a band ofadventurers?
Doyou find itchallenging to teach new allies the ways
ofthe wild, or do you welcome lhe relief from solitude
that they offer?
CLASS FEATURESQUICK BUILD
Voucan make a ranger quickly by following these
suggestions. First, make Dexterity your highest ability
score, followed byWisdom. (Some rangers who focus
on two-weapon fighting make Strength higher than
Dexterity.) Second, choose the outlander background.Proficiency Spells-Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Levei Bonus Features Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
1st +2 Favored Enemy, Natural Explorer
2nd +2 Fighting Style, Spellcasting 2 2
3rd +2 Ranger Archetype, Primeval Awareness 3 3
4th +2 Ability Score Improvement 3 3
5th +3Extra Attack 4 4 2
6th +3 Favored Enemy and Natural Explorer improvements 4 4 2
7th +3 Ranger Archetype feature 5 4 3
8th +3Ability Score Improvement, Land's Stride 5 4 3
9th +4 643 2
10th +4 Natural Explorer improvement, Hide in plain Sight 643 2
11th +4 Ranger Archetype feature 7 4 3 3
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 7 4 3 3
13th +5 8 4 3 3 1
14th +5 Favored Enemy improvement, Vanish 84 3 3 1
15th +5 Ranger Archetype feature 94 3 3 2
16th Ability Score Improvement 943 3 2
17th 10 4 3 3 3 1
18th Feral Senses 1043 3 3 1
19th Ability Score Improvement 11 4 3 3 3 2
20th Foe Slayer 1143 3 3 2
mixture ofamusement, frustration, and compassion.
But they quickly learn that other adventurers who can
carry their own weight in a fight against civilization's
foes are worth any extra burden. Coddled city folk might
not know how to feed themselves or find fresh water in
the wild, but they make up for itin other ways.
CREATING A RANGER As a ranger, you gain the following class features.
As you create your ranger character, consider the nature
ofthe training that gave you your particular capabilities.
Didyou train with a single mentor, wandering lhe wilds
together until you mastered the ranger's ways? Didyou
leave your apprenticeship, or was your mentor slain-
perhaps bythe same kind ofmonster that became your
favored enemy? Or perhaps you learned your skills as
part ofa band ofrangers affiliated with a druidic circle,
trained in mystic paths as well as wilderness lore. Vou
might be self-taught, a recluse who learned combat
skills, tracking, and even a magical connection to nature
through the necessity ofsurviving in the wilds.
What's the source ofyour particular hatred ofa
certain kind ofenemy? Did a monster kill someone
you loved or destroy your home village? Or did you see
toa much oflhe destruction these monsters cause and
commit yourself to reining in their depredations? [s
your adventuring career a continuation ofyour work
in protecting the borderlands, or a significant change?HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1dlO per ranger levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 10 +your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ldl0 (or 6) +your
Constitution modifier per ranger levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills: Choose three from Animal Handling,
Athletics, Insight, [nvestigation, Nature, Perception,
Stealth, and Survival
EQUIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
90PART 1ICLASSES
(a)scalemail or (b)leather armor
(a)two shortswords or (b)two simpie melee weapons
(a)a dungeoneer's pack or (b)an explorer's pack
A longbow and a quiver of 20 arrows
FAVORED ENEMY
Beginning at 1st levei, you have significant experience
studying, tracking, hunting, and even talking to a certain
type of enemy.
Choose a type of favored enemy: aberrations,
beasts, celestiais, constructs, dragons, elementals, fey,
fiends, giants, monstrosities, oozes, plants, or undead.
Alternatively, you can select two races of humanoid
(such as gnolls and orcs) as favored enemies.
Vou have advantage on Wisdom (Survival) checks to
track your favored enemies, as well as on Intelligence
checks to recall information about them.
When you gain this feature, you also learn one
language of your choice that is spoken by your favored
enemies, if they speak one at alI.
Vou choose one additional favored enemy, as well as
an associated language, at 6th and 14th leveI. As you
gain leveis, your choices should reflect the types of
monsters you have encountered on your adventures.
NATURAL EXPLORER
Vou are particularly familiar with one type of natural
environment and are adept at traveling and surviving in
such regions. Choose one type of favored terrain: arctic,
coast, desert, forest, grassland, mountain, swamp,
or the Underdark. When you make an Intelligence or
Wisdom check related to your favored terrain, your
proficiency bonus is doubled ifyou are using a skill that
you're proficient in.
While traveling for an hour or more in your favored
terrain, you gain the following benefits:
Difticult terrain doesn't slow your group's traveI.
Your group can't become lost except by magical
means.
Even when you are engaged in another activity while
traveling (such as foraging, navigating, or tracking),
you remain alert to danger.
If you are traveling alone, you can move stealthily at
a normal pace.
When you forage, you find twice as much food as you
normally would.
While tracking other creatures, you also learn their
exact number, their sizes, and how long ago they
passed through the area.
Vou choose additional favored terra in types aI 6th
and 10th leveI.
FIGHTING STYLE
At 2nd levei, you adopt a particular style of fighting as
your specialty. Choose one of the following options.
Vou can't take a Fighting Style option more than once,
even ifyou later get to choose again.ARCHERY
Vou gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with
ranged weapons.
DEFENSE
While you are wearing armor, you gain a +I bonus to AC.
DUELING
When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
with that weapon.
TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING
When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add
your ability modifier to the damage of the second attack.
SPELLCASTING
By the time you reach 2nd levei, you have learned to
use the magical essence of nature to cast spells, much
as a druid does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the ranger spell Iist.
SPELL SLOTS
The Ranger table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's leveI
or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
For example, ifyou know the 1st-levei spell animal
friendship and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-leveI spell slot
available, you can cast animal friendship using either slot.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVE L AND HIGHER
Vou know two 1st-levei spells ofyour choice from the
ranger spelllist.
The Spells Known column of the Ranger table shows
when you learn more ranger spells of your choice. Each
of these spells must be of a levei for which you have
9'
spell slots. For instance, when you reach 5th levei in this
c1ass, you can learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass,
you can choose one of the ranger spells you know
and replace it with another spell from the ranger
spelllist, which also must be of a leveI for which you
have spell slots.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your ranger
spells, since your magic draws on your attunement to
nature. Vou use your Wisdom whenever a spell refers
to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your
Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw De for
a ranger spell you cast and when making an attack roll
with one.
Spell saveDe~8+your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Spell altack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier
RANGER ARCHETYPE
At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you strive
to emulate: Hunter or Beast Master, both detailed at
the end of the c1ass description. Your choice grants
you features at 3rd levei and again at 7th, 11th,
and 15th leveI.
PRIMEVAL AWARENESS
Beginning at 3rd levei, you can use your action and
expend one ranger spell slot to focus your awareness on
the region around you. For 1 minute per leveI of the spell
slot you expend, you can sense whether the following
types of creatures are present within 1 mile of you (or
within up to 6 miles ifyou are in your favored terra in):
aberrations, celestiais, dragons, elementals, fey, fiends,
and undead. This feature doesn't reveal the creatures'
location or number.ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno
LAND'S STRIDE
Starting at 8th leveI, moving through nonmagical
difficult terra in costs you no extra movement. Vou can
also pass through nonmagical plants without being
slowed by them and without taking damage from them if
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard.
In addition, you have advantage on saving throws
against plants that are magically created or manipulated
to impede movement, such those created by the
entangle spell.
HIDE IN PLAIN SIGHT
Starting at 10th leveI, you can spend 1 minute creating
camouflage for yourself. Vou must have access to fresh
mud, dirt. plants. soot. and other naturally occurring
materiaIs with which to create your camouflage.
Once you are camouflaged in this way, you can try
to hide by pressing yourself up against a solid surface,
such as a tree or wall, that is at least as tall and wide
as you are. Vou gain a +10 bonus to Dexterity (Stealth)
checks as long as you remain there without moving or
taking actions. Once you move or take an action or a
reaction, you must camouflage yourself again to gain
this benefit.
VANISH
Starting at 14th levei, you can use the Hide action as a
bonus action on your turno AIso, you can't be tracked by
nonmagical means, unless you choose to leave a trail.
FERAL SENSES
At 18th levei, you gain preternatural senses that help
you fight creatures you can't see. When you attack a
creature you can't see, your inability to see it doesn't
impose disadvantage on your attack rolls against il.
Vou are also aware of the location of any invisible
creature within 30 feet of you, provided that the
creature isn't hidden from you and you aren't
blinded or deafened.
FOE SLAYER
At 20th levei, you become an unparalleled hunter of your
enemies. Once on each of your turns, you can add your
Wisdom modifier to the attack roll or the damage roll of
an attack you make against one of your favored enemies.
Vou can choose to use this feature before or after the
roll, but before any effects of the roll are applied.
RANGER ARCHETYPES
The ideal ofthe ranger has two classic expressions: the
Hunter and the Beast Master.
HUNTER
Emulating the Hunter archetype means accepting your
place as abulwark between civilization and the terrors
ofthe wilderness. Asyou walk the Hunter's path, you
learn specialized techniques forfighting the threats
you face, from rampaging ogres and hordes ofores to
towering giants and terrifying dragons.
HUNTER'S PREY
At3rd levei,you gain one ofthe following features
ofyour choice.
C%ssus S/ayer. Yourtenacity can wear down
the most potent foes. When you hit acreature with a
weapon attack, the creature takes an extra ld8 damage
ifit's below its hit point maximum. Voucan deal this
extra damage only once per turno
GiantKi//er. When a Large or larger creature within
5feet ofyou hits or misses you with an attack, you can
use your reaction toattack that creature immediately
after itsattack, provided that you can see the creature.
Horde Breaker. Once on each ofyour turns when you
make aweapon attack, you can make another attack
with the same weapon against adifferent creature that
iswithin 5feet ofthe original target and within range
ofyour weapon.
DEFENSIVE TACTICS
At7th leveI,you gain one ofthe foIlowing features
ofyour choice.
Escape the Horde. Opportunity attacks against you
are made with disadvantage.
Mu/tiattack Defense. When acreature hits you
with an attack, you gain a+4 bonus toACagainst
ali subsequent attacks made bythat creature forthe
rest ofthe turno
Stee/ Wi//. Vouhave advantage on saving throws
against being frightened.
MULTIATTACK
At 11thlevei,you gain one ofthe following features
ofyour choice.
Vo//ey.Voucan use your action tomake a ranged
attack against any number ofcreatures within 10feet
ofapoint you can see within your weapon's range. Vou
must have ammunition for each target, as normal, and
you make aseparate attack roll foreach target.
Whir/wind Attack. Voucan use your action tomake a
melee attack against any number ofcreatures within 5
feet ofyou, with aseparate attack roIlforeach target.
SUPERIOR HUNTER'S DEFENSE
At 15th levei,you gain one ofthe following features
ofyour choice.
Evasion.Voucan nimbly dodge out ofthe way of
certa inarea effects, such as a red dragon's fierybreath
or alightning bolt spel!. When you are subjected toan
effect that allows you tomake a Dexterity saving throw
totake only half damage, you instead take nodamageifyou succeed on the saving throw, and only half
damage ifyou fai!'
Stand Against the Tide. When ahostile creature
misses youwith ameleeattack, youcan use your reaction
toforce that creature torepeat the same attack against
another creature (other than itself) ofyour choice.
Uncanny Dodge. When an attacker that you can see
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
halve the attack's damage against you.
BEAST MASTER
The Beast Master archetype embodies a friendship
between the civilized races and the beasts ofthe world.
United infocus, beast and ranger work as one tofight
the monstrous foes that threaten civilization and the
wilderness alike. Emulating the Beast Master archetype
means committing yourself tothis ideal, working in
partnership with all animal as its companion and friend.
RANGER'S COMPANION
At3rd levei,you gain a beast companion that
accompanies you onyour adventures and istrained to
fight alongside you. Choose a beast that isno larger than
Medium and that has achaIlenge rating of 1/4or lower
(appendix Opresellts statistics forthe hawk, mastiff,
and panther as examples). Addyour proficiency bonus
tothe beast's AC,attack roIls, and damage rolls, as weIl
as toany saving throws and skills itis proficient in. Its
hit poinl maximum equals its normal maximum or four
times your ranger leveI,whichever ishigher.
The beast obeys your commands as best as itcanoIt
takes its turn onyour initiative, though itdoesn't take an
action unless you command itto.Onyour turn, you can
verbally command the beast where to move (noaction
required byyou).Voucan use your action toverbally
command ittotake the Attack, Dash, Disengage, Dodge,
or Help action. Once you have the Extra Attack feature,
you can make one weapon attack yourself when you
command the beast totake the Attack action.
While traveling through your favored terrain with only
the beast, you can move stealthily at anormal pace.
lfthe beast dies, you can obtain another one by
spending 8hours magicaIly bonding with another beast
that isn't hostile toyou, either the same type ofbeast as
before or adifferent one.
EXCEPTIONAL TRAINING
Beginning at 7th levei, on any ofyour turns when
your beast companion doesn't attack, you can use a
bonus action tocommand the beast totake the Dash,
Disengage, Dodge, or Help action on its turno
BESTIAL FURY
Starting at 11th leveI,your beast companion can
make two attacks when you command itto use the
Attack action.
SHARE SPELLS
Beginning at 15th levei,when you cast aspell targeting
yourself, you can also affect your beast companion with
the spell ifthe beast iswithin 30 feet of YOU.
PART I I CL~SSES
93
9+PART 1 ICLASSESROGUE
Signaling forher companions towait, a halfling creeps
forward through the dungeon hall. She presses an ear
tothe door, then pulls out a set oftools and picks the
lock in the blink ofan eye.Then she disappears into
the shadows as her fighter friend moves forward tokick
the door open.
Ahuman lurks in the shadows ofan alleywhile his
accomplice prepares forher part inthe ambush. When
their target-a notorious slaver-passes the alleyway,
the accomplice cries out, the slaver comes toinvestigate,
and the assassin's blade cuts his throat before he can
make a sound.
Suppressing a giggle, a gnome waggles her fingers
and magically lifts the keyring from the guard's belt.
In a moment, the keys are in her hand, the cell door is
open, and she and her companions are free tomake
their escape.
Rogues relyon skill, stealth, and their foes'
vulnerabilities toget the upper hand inanysituation.
They have a knack forfinding the solution tojust about
any problem, demonstrating a resourcefulness and
versatility that is the cornerstone ofanysuccessful
adventuring party.
SKILL AND PRECISION
Rogues devote as much effort tomastering the use of
a variety ofskills as they dotoperfecting their combat
abilities, giving them a broad expertise that fewother
characters can match. Manyrogues focus on stealth and
deception, while others refine the skills that help them
ina dungeon environment, such as climbing, finding and
disarming traps, and opening locks.
When itcomes tocombat, rogues prioritize cunning
over brute strength. Arogue would rather make one
precise strike, placing itexactly where the attack will
hurt the target most, than wear an opponent down
with a barrage ofattacks. Rogues have an almost
supernatural knack foravoiding danger, and a fewlearn
magical tricks to supplement their other abilities.
ASHADY LIVING
Every town and city has its share ofrogues. Most of
them liveupto the worst stereotypes ofthe class,
making a livingas burglars, assassins, cutpurses, and
con artists. Often, these scoundrels are organized
into thieves' guilds or crime families. Plenty ofrogues
operate independently, but even they sometimes
recruit apprentices tohelp them in their scams
and heists. Afewrogues make an honest livingas
THE ROGUE
Proficiency Sneak
levei Bonus Attack Features
1st +2 1d6Expertise,SneakAttack,
Thieves'Cant
2nd +2 1d6CunningAction
3rd +2 2d6 RoguishArchetype
4th +2 2d6 AbilityScoreImprovement
5th +3 3d6 UncannyDodge
6th +3 3d6 Experlise
7th +3 4d6Evasion
8th +3 4d6 AbilityScoreImprovement
9th +4 5d6 RoguishArchetypefeature
10th +4 5d6 AbilityScoreImprovemenl
11th +4 6d6 ReliableTalent
12th +4 6d6 AbilityScoreImprovement
13th +5 7d6RoguishArchetypefeature
14th +5 7d6Blindsense
15th +5 8d6 SlipperyMind
16th +5 8d6 AbilityScoreImprovement
17th +6 9d6RoguishArchetypefealure
18th +6 9d6 Elusive
19th +6 10d6 AbilityScoreImprovement
20th +6 10d6 Strokeofluck
locksmilhs, invesligalors, or exlerminalors, which can
be a dangerous job in a world where dire rals-and
wererals-haunt lhe sewers.
As adventurers, rogues fali on both sides oflhe law.
Some are hardened criminais who decide lo seek
lheir forlune in lreasure hoards, while olhers lake up
a tife ofadvenlure to escape from lhe law. Some have
learned and perfecled lheir skills wilh lhe exptieit
purpose of infillrating aneient ruins and hidden crypts
in search oftreasure.
CREATING A ROGUE
Asyou create your rogue character, consider the
character's relationship to the law. Doyou have a
criminal past-or present? Are you on the run from the
law or from an angry thieves' guild master? Or did you
leave your guild in search ofbigger risks and bigger
rewards? Is itgreed that drives you in your adventures.
or some other desire or ideal?
What was the trigger that led you away from your
previous life? Did a great con or heist gone terribly
wrong cause you to reevaluate your career? Maybe
you were lucky and a successful robbery gave you the
coin you needed to escape the squalor ofyour !ife.
Did wanderlust finally call you away from your home?
Perhaps you suddenly found yourself cut offfrom your
family or your mentor, and you had to find a new means
ofsupport. Or maybe you made a new friend-another
member ofyour aelventuring party-who showeel you
new possibilities forearning a tiving anelemploying
your particular talents.QUICK BUILD
Youcan make a rogue quickly byfollowing
these suggestions. First. Dexterity should
be your highest ability score. Make
Intelligence your next-highest ifyou want to
excel at Investigation or plan to take up the
Arcane Trickster archetype. Choose Charisma
instead ifyou plan to emphasize deception and soeial
interaction. Second, choose the charlatan background.
CLASS FEATURES
As a rogue, you have the following cIass features.
HIT POINTS
Hil Diee: 1dSper rogue levei
Hil Poinls aI Is1 Levei: S +your Constitution modifier
Hil Poinls aI Higher LeveIs: 1dS(or 5)+your
Constitution modifier per rogue levei after 1st
PROFIClENCIES
Armor: Light armor
Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
longsworels, rapiers, shortswords
Tools: Thieves' tools
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Intelligence
Skills: Choose four from Acrobatics, Athletics,
Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Investigation,
Perception, Pcrformance, Persuasion. Sleight of
Hanel, anelStealth
PART 1 CLASSES95
EQUIPMENT
Youstart with the following equipment, inaddition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)arapier or (b)ashortsword
(a)ashortbow and quiver of20 arrows or (b)a
shortsword
(a)aburglar's pack, (b)adungeoneer's pack, or(c)an
explorer's pack
Leather armor, two daggers, and thieves' tools
EXPERTISE
At 1stleveI,choose two ofyour skill proficiencies, or
one ofyour skill proficiencies and your proficiency with
thieves' tooIs.Yourproficiency bonus isdoubled forany
ability check you make that uses either ofthe chosen
proficiencies.
At6th levei,you can choose two more ofyour
proficiencies (inskills orwith thieves' tools) togain
this benefit.
SNEAK ATTACK
Beginning at 1stlevei,you know how tostrike subtly
and exploit afoe's distraction. Once per turn, youcan
deal an extra Id6 damage toone creature you hitwith
an attack ifyou have advantage on the attack rol!.The
attack must use afinesse or aranged weapon.
Youdon't need advantage on the attack roll ifanother
enemy ofthe target iswithin 5feet ofit,that enemy
isn't incapacitated, and you don't have disadvantage on
the attack rol!.
The amount ofthe extra damage increases as you
gain leveis inthis class, as shown inthe Sneak Attack
column ofthe Rogue table.
THIEVES' CANT
During your rogue training you learned thieves' cant, a
secret mix ofdialect, jargon, and code that allows you to
hide messages inseemingly normal conversation. Only
another creature that knows thieves' cant understands
such messages. lttakes four times longer toconvey sueh
amessage than itdoes tospeak the same idea plainly.
In addition, you understand aset ofsecret signs and
symbols used toconvey short, simple messages, such
as whether an area isdangerous or the territory ofa
thieves' guild, whether loot isnearby, orwhether thepeople inan area are easy marks orwill provide asafe
house forthieves on the run.
CUNNING ACTION
Starting at 2nd levei,your quick thinking and agility
allow you tomove and act quickly. Youcan take a
bonus action on each ofyour turns incombat. This
action can beused only totake the Dash, Disengage,
or Hide action.
ROGUISH ARCHETYPE
At3rd leveI,you choose an archetype that you emulate
inthe exercise ofyour rogue abilities: Thief, Assassin,
orArcane Trickster, ali detailed at the end ofthe class
description. Yourarchetype choice grants you features
at 3rd leveiand then again at 9th, 13th, and 17thleve!.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at8th, 10th, 12th,
16th, and 19th levei,you can increase one ability score
ofyour choice by2,oryou can increase two ability
scores ofyour choice by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase
an ability score above 20 using this feature.
UNCANNY DODGE
Starting at 5th levei,when an attacker that you can see
hits you with an attack, youcan use your reaction to
halve the attack's damage against you.
EVASION
Beginning at 7th levei,you can nimbly dodge out ofthe
way ofcertain area effects, such as ared dragon's fiery
breath or an ice stormspell. When you are subjected
toan effect that allows you tomake aDexterity saving
throw totake only half damage, you instead take no
damage ifyousucceed on the saving throw, and only
half damage ifyou fai!'
RELIABLE TALENT
By 11th levei,you have refined your chosen skills until
they approach perfection. Whenever you make an ability
check that lets you add your proficiency bonus, youcan
treat ad20 roll of9or lower as a 10.
BLINDSENSE
Starting at 14thlevei,ifyou are able tohear, you are
aware ofthe location ofany hidden or invisible creature
withinlOfeet ofyou.
SLIPPERY MIND
By 15th leveI,you have acquired greater mental
strength. Yougain proficiency inWisdom saving throws.
ELUSIVE
Beginning at 18th levei,you are so evasive that
attackers rarely gain the upper hand against you. No
attack roll has advantage against youwhile you aren't
incapacitated.
9
6PART IICLASSES
STROKE OF LUCK
At 20th leveI,you have an uncanny knack for succeeding
when you need to. Ifyour attack misses a target within
range, you can turn the miss into a hit. Alternatively, if
you failan ability check, you can treat the d20 roll as a 20.
.Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a short or long resto
ROGUISH ARCHETYPES
Rogues have many features in common, including their
emphasis on perfecting their skills, their precise and
deadly approach to combat, and their increasingly quick
reflexes. But different rogues steer those talents in
varying directions, embodied bythe rogue archetypes.
Vour choice ofarchetype is a reflection ofyour focus-
not necessarily an indication ofyour chosen profession,
but a description ofyour preferred techniques.
THIEF
Vouhone your skills in the larcenous arts. Burglars,
bandits, cutpurses, and other criminais typically follow
this archetype, but so do rogues who prefer to think of
themselves as professional treasure seekers, explorers,
delvers, and investigators. In addition to improving your
agility and stealth, you learn skills useful for delving into
ancient ruins, reading unfamiliar languages, and using
magic items you normally couldn't employ.
FAST HANDS
Starting at 3rd leveI,you can use the bonus action
granted byyour Cunning Action to make a Dexterity
(Sleight ofHand) check, use your thieves' tools to
disarm a trap or open a lock, or take the Use an
Object action.
SECOND-STORY WORK
When you choose this archetype at 3rd levei,you gain
the ability to climb faster than normal; climbing no
longer costs you extra movement.
In addition, when you make a runningjump, the
distance you cover increases bya number offeet equal
toyour Dexterity modifier.
SUPREME SNEAK
Starting at 9th levei,you have advantage on a Dexterity
(Stealth) check ifyou move no more than half your
speed on the same turn.
USE MAGIC DEVICE
By 13th leveI,you have learned enough about the
workings of magic that you can improvise the use of
items even when they are not intended for YOU.Vou
ignore ali class, race, and levei requirements on the use
of magic items.
THIEF'S REFLEXES
When you reach 17th levei,you have become adept at
laying ambushes and quickly escaping danger. Voucan
take two turns during the first round ofany combat. Vou
take your first turn at your normal initiative and yoursecond turn at your initiative minus 10.Voucan't use
this feature when you are surprised.
ASSASSIN
Voufocus your training on the grim art ofdeath. Those
who adhere to this archetype are diverse: hired killers,
spies, bounty hunters, and even specially anointed
priests trained to exterminate the enemies of their deity.
Stealth, poison, and disguise help you eliminate your
foes with deadly efficiency.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES
When you choose this archetype at 3rd levei,you gain
proficiency with the disguise kit and the poisoner's kit.
ASSASSINATE
Starting at 3rd levei,you are at your deadliest when you
get the drop on your enemies. Vouhave advantage on
attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken a turn
in the combat yet. In addition, any hit you score against
a creature that is surprised is a criticai hit.
INFILTRATION EXPERTISE
Starting at 9th leveI,you can unfailingly create false
identities foryourself. Vou must spend seven days and
25 gp to establish the history, profession, and affiliations
for an identity. Voucan't establish an identity that
belongs to someone else. For example, you might acquire
appropriate clothing, letters ofintroduction, and official-
looking certification to establish yourself as a member of
a trading house from a remote city so you can insinuate
yourself into the company ofother wealthy merchants.
Thereafter, ifyou adopt the new identity as a disguise,
other creatures believe you to be that person until given
an obvious reason not to.
IMPOSTOR
At 13th leveI,you gain the ability to unerringly mimic
another person's speech, writing, and behavior.
Voumust spend at least three hours studying
these three components ofthe person's behavior,
listening to speech, examining handwriting, and
observing mannerisms.
Vour ruse is indiscernible to the casual observer. Ira
wary creature suspects something is amiss, you have
advantage on any Charisma (Deception) check you make
to avoid detection.
DEATH STRIKE
Starting at 17th leveI,you become a master ofinstant
death. When you attack and hit a creature that is
surprised, it must make a Constitution saving throw
(DC 8+your Dexterity modifier +your proficiency
bonus). On a failed save, double the damage ofyour
attack against the creature.
ARCANE TRICKSTER
Some rogues enhance their fine-honed skills ofstealth
and agility with magic, learning tricks ofenchantment
and illusion. These rogues include pickpockets and
burglars, but also pranksters, mischief-makers, and a
significant number ofadventurers.
PART 1 CLASSES9i
9
8SPELLCASTING
When you reach 3rd levei,you gain the ability to
cast spells. See chapter 10for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 1i for the wizard spelllisl.
Cantrips. Voulearn three cantrips: mage hand and
two other cantrips ofyour choice fram the wizard spell
lisl. Vou learn another wizard cantrip ofyour choice
at 10th leveI.
Spel1 S/ots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting
table shows how many spell slots you have to cast
your spells of 1st levei and higher. Tocast one ofthese
spells, you must expend a slot ofthe spell's leveIor
higher. Vouregain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
For example. ifyou know the Ist.level spell charm
personand have a Ist.level and a 2nd.level spell slot
available, you can cast charm person using either slol.
Spel1sKnownof1st.Level and Higher. Vouknow
three Ist.level wizard spells ofyour choice, two ofwhich
you must choose from the enchantment and iIIusion
spells on the wizard spell lisl.
The Spells Known column ofthe Arcane Trickster
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard
spells of 1st levei ar higher. Each ofthese spells must
be an enchantment or illusion spell ofyour choice, and
must be ofa levei forwhich you have spell slots. For
instance, when you reach 7th levei in this c1ass. you can
learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
The spells you learn at 8th. 14th, and 20th levei can
come fram any school ofmagic.
Whenever you gain a levei in this c1ass, you can
replace one ofthe wizard spells you know with another
spell ofyour choice from the wizard spell lisl. The
new spell must be of a levei for which you have spell
slots. and itmust be an enchantment or illusion spell,
unless you're replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th,
ar 20th leveI.
Spel1casting Ability. Intelligence isyour spellcasting
ability foryour wizard spells, since you learn your
spells thraugh dedicated study and memorization.
Vouuse your lntelligence whenever a spell refers to
your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your
Intelligence modifier when setting the saving thraw
DC for a wizard spell you cast and when making an
allack rall with one.
Spell saveDe~8+your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
Spell altack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
MACE HAND LEGERDEMAIN
Starting at 3rd levei, when you cast mage hand, you can
make the spectral hand invisible. and you can perform
the following additionaltasks with it:
Voucan stow one objectthe hand is holding in a
container worn ar carried byanother creature.
Voucan retrieve an object in a container worn or
carried byanother creature.
Voucan use thieves' tools to pick locks and disarm
traps at range.
PART 1 CLASSESARCANE TRICKSTER SPELLCASTINC
Rogue Cantrips Spells-Spell Slots per Spell Level-
Levei KnownKnown 1st 2nd 3rd 4th
3rd 3 3 2
4th 3 4 3
5th 3 43
6th 3 43
7th 3 5 42
8th 3 6 4 2
9th 3 642
10th 4 7 4 3
11th 4 8 43
12th 4 8 4 3
13th 4 9 4 3 2
14th 4 10 4 3 2
15th 4 10 4 3 2
16th 4 11 4 3 3
17th 4 11 4 3 3
18th 4 11 4 3 3
19th 4 12 4 3 3
20th 4 13 4 3 3
Voucan perform one ofthese tasks without being
noticed bya creature ifyou succeed on a Dexterity
(Sleight of Hand) check contested bythe creature's
Wisdom (Perception) check.
In addition, you can use the bonus action granted by
your Cunning Action to contralthe hand.
MAGICAL AMBUSH
Starting at 9th levei, ifyou are hidden from a
creature when you cast a spell on it, the creature has
disadvantage on any saving throw it makes againstthe
spellthis turno
VERSATILE TRICKSTER
At 13th leveI,you gain the ability to distracttargets with
yourmage hand. As a bonus action onyour turn, you can
designate a creature within 5 feet ofthe spectral hand
created bythe spell. Doing so gives you advantage on
allack ralls against that creature untilthe end ofthe turno
SPELL THIEF
At 17th levei,you gain the ability to magically
stealthe knowledge ofhow to cast a spell fram
another spellcaster.
Immediately after a creature casts a spellthattargets
you ar includes you in its area ofeffect,you can use your
reaction to force the creature to make a saving thraw
with its spellcasting ability modifier. The DC equals
your spell save De. On a failed save, you negate the
spell's effect against you, and you stealthe knowledge
ofthe spell ifitis at least 1st leveIand ofa leveiyou can
cast (itdoesn't need to be a wizard spell). For the next
8 hours, you know the spell and can cast it using your
spell slolS. The crealure can't casl lhat spell untilthe
8 hours have passed.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a long resl.
SORCERER
Golden eyes flashing, ahuman
stretches out her hand and unleashes
the dragonfire that burns inher veins.
Asan inferno rages around her foes,
leathery wings spread from her back and
she takes tothe air.
Long hair whipped bya conjured wind,
ahalf.elf spreads his arms wide and throws
his head back. Lifting him momentarily off
the ground. awave ofmagic surges up inhim,
through him, and out from him inamighty blast
oflightning.
Crouching behind astalagmite, ahalfling points a
finger atacharging troglodyte. Ablast offiresprings
from her finger tostrike the creature. She ducks back
behind the rock formation with agrin, unaware that her
wild magic has turned her skin bright blue.
Sorcerers carry amagical birthright conferred
upon them byan exotic bloodline, some otherworldly
influence. or exposure to unknown cosmic forces.
One can't study sorcery as one learns a language, any
more than one can learn tolivealegendary life.Noone
chooses sorcery; the power chooses the sorcerer.
RAW MAGIe
Magic isapart ofevery sorcerer. suffusing body,mind,
and spirit with alatent power that waits tobe tapped.
Some sorcerers wield magic that springs from an
ancient bloodline infused with the magic ofdragons.
Others carry araw,uncontrolled magic within them,
achaotic storm that manifests inunexpected ways.
The appearance ofsorcerous powers iswildly
unpredictable. Some draconic bloodlines produce
exactly one sorcerer inevery generation, but inother
lines ofdescent every individual isasorcerer. Most
ofthe time, the talents ofsorcery appear as apparent
flukes. Some sorcerers can't name the origin oftheir
power, while others trace ittostrange events intheir
own lives. The touch ofademon, the blessing ofa
dryad atababy's birth, orataste ofthe water from
amysterious spring might spark the giftofsorcery.
So toa might the giftofadeity ofmagic, exposure
tothe elemental forces ofthe [nner Planes orthe
maddening chaos ofLimbo, or aglimpse into the
inner workings ofreality.
Sorcerers have nouse forthe spellbooks and ancient
tomes ofmagic lore that wizards relyon. nor do they
rely onapatron togrant their spells as warlocks do.
Bylearning toharness and channel their own inborn
magic, they can discover new and staggering ways
tounleash that power.
UNEXPLAINED POWERS
Sorcerers are rare inthe world, and it's unusual tofind
asorcerer who isnot involved inthe adventuring life
insome way.People with magical power seething in
their veins soon discover that the power doesn't like to
stay quiet. Asorcerer's magic wants tobewielded. and
ithas atendency tospill out inunpredictable ways if
itisn't called on.
PART In~SSFS
QUICK BUILD
Voucan make a sorcerer quickly byfollowing these
suggestions. First, Charisma should be your highest
ability score, followed byConstitution. Second,
choose the hermit background. Third, choose the
light, prestidigitation, ray of frost, andshocking grasp
cantrips, along with the 1st-levei spells shieldand
magic missile.links you to a powerful individual in the world-the fey
creature that blessed you at birth, the dragon who put
a drop ofits blood into your veins, the lich who created
you as an experiment, or the deity who chose you to
carry this power.Proficiency Sorcery Cantrips Spells-Spell SlotsperSpellLevel-
Bonus Points Features Known Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
1st+2 spellcasting,sorcerous 4 2 2
Origin
2nd +2 2 FontofMagic 4 3 3
3rd +2 3 Metamagic 4 4 4 2
4th +2 4 Abilityscore Improvement 5 5 43
5th +3 5 5 6 4 3 2
6th +3 6 sorcerous Originfeature 5 7 43 3
7th +3 7 5 8 43 3 1
8th +3 8 AbilityScoreImprovement 5 9 433 2
9th +4 9 5 10 4 3 3 3 1
10th +4 10 Metamagic 611 4 33 3 2
11th +4 11 612 4 3 3 3 2 1
12th +4 12 AbilityScoreImprovement 6 12 43 3 3 21
13th +5 13 613 4 3 3 3 2 11
14th +5 14 sorcerous Originfeature 6 13 43 3 3 2 11
15th +5 15 6 14 43 3 3 2 1 1
16th +5 16 AbilityScoreImprovement 6 14 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
17th +6 17 Metamagic 6 15 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
18th +6 18 sorcerous Originfeature 6 15 4 3 3 3 3 1 1
19th +6 19 Abilityscore Improvement 6 15 433 3 3 2 1
20th +6 20Sorcerous Restoration 615 4 3 3 3 32 2
Sorcerers often
have obscure or quixotic
motivations driving them
to adventure. Some seek a greater
understanding ofthe magical force that infuses
them, or the answer to the mystery ofits origino Others
hope to find a way to get rid of it,or to unleash its full
potential. Whatever their goals, sorcerers are every bit
as useful to an adventuring party as wizards, making
up for a compara tive lack ofbreadth in their magical
knowledge with enormous flexibility in using the
spells they know,
CREATING A SORCERER
The most important question to consider when creating
your sorcerer is the origin ofyour power. As a starting
character, you'lI choose an origin that ties to a draconic
bloodline or the influence ofwild magic, but the exact
source ofyour power is up toyou to decide. Is ita family
curse, passed down toyou from distant ancestors? ar
did some extraordinary event leave you blessed with
inherent magic but perhaps scarred as well?
How do you feel about the magical power coursing
through you? Doyou embrace it,try to master it,or
revel in its unpredictable nature? Is ita blessing or
a curse? Didyou seek itout, or did itfind you? Did
you have the option to refuse it,and doyou wish you
had? What do you intend to do with it? Perhaps you
feellike you've been given this power for some lofty
purpose. ar you might decide that the power gives you
the right to do what you want, to take what you want
from those who lack such power, Perhaps your powerCLASS FEATURES
As a sorcerer, you gain the following c1ass features.
HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: Id6 per sorcerer levei
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 6 +your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: Id6 (or 4) +your
Constitution modifier per sorcerer leveIafter 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armar: Nane
Weapons: Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs,
light crossbows
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Constitution, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Deception, Insight,
Intimidation, Persuasion, and Religion
100PART IICLASSES
CREATlNC SPELL SLOTSFONT OF MAGICSORCEROUS ORIGIN
Sorcery
PointCost
2
3
5
6
7SpellSlot
Levei
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5thAt2nd levei,you tap into a deep wellspring ofmagic
within yourself. This wellspring is represented by
sorcery points, which allow you tocreate avariety of
magical effects.
SORCERY POINTS
Vouhave 2sorcery points, and you gain more as you
reach higher leveis. as shown in the Sorcery Points
column ofthe Sorcerer table. Youcan never have
more sorcery points than shown on the table foryour
leveI.Vouregain ali spent sorcery points when you
finish a long rest.
FLEXIBLE CASTING
Voucan use your sorcery points togain additional spell
slots. or sacrifice spell slots to gain additional sorcery
points. Voulearn other ways to use your sorcery points
as you reach higher leveis.
Creating Spel1 S/ots. Voucan transform unexpended
sorcery points into one spell slot as a bonus action on
your turnoThe Creating Spell Slots table shows the cost
ofcreating a spell slot ofa given leveI.Voucan create
spell slots no higher in leveIthan 5th.Choose a sorcerous origin, which describes the
source ofyour innate magical power: Draconic
Bloodline or Wild Magic, both detailed at the end ofthe
c1ass description.
Your choice grants you features when you choose itat
1st leveIand again at 6th, 14th, and 18th leveI.SPELLCASTING Focus
Voucan use an arcane focus (found in chapter 5)as a
spellcasting focus foryour sorcerer spells.
An event inyour past, or in the lifeofa parent or
ancestor, left an indelible mark onyou, infusing you with
arcane magic. This font ofmagic, whatever its origin,
fuels your spells. See chapter 10for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11forthe sorcerer spelllist.SPELLCASTING
CANTRIPS
At 1st leveI,you know four cantrips ofyour choice from
the sorcerer spelllist. Voulearn additional sorcerer
cantrips ofyour choice at higher leveis, as shown in the
Cantrips Known column ofthe Sorcerer table.
SPELL SLOTS
The Sorcerer table shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. Tocast
one ofthese sorcerer spells, you must expend a slot of
the spell's levei or higher. Vouregain ali expended spell
slots when you finish a long rest.
For example, ifyou know the 1st-levei spell burning
handsand have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-levei spell slot
available, you can cast burning hands using either slot.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HWHER
Vouknow two 1st-levei spells ofyour choice from the
sorcerer spelllist.
The Spells Known column ofthe Sorcerer table
shows when you learn more sorcerer spells ofyour
choice. Each ofthese spells must be ofa leveiforwhich
you have spell slots. For instance, when you reach 3rd
leveiinthis c1ass,you can learn one new spell of 1st
or 2nd leveI.
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass,
you can choose one ofthe sorcerer spells you know
and replace itwith another spell from the sorcerer
spelllist, which also must be ofa levei forwhich you
have spell slots.EQUIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted byyour background:
(a)alight crossbow and 20 bolts or (b)any simple
weapon
(a)acomponent pouch or (b)an arcane focus
(a)a dungeoneer's pack or (b)an explorer's pack
Twodaggers
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Charisma isyour spellcasting ability foryour sorcerer
spells, since the power ofyour magic relies onyour
ability to project your will into the world. Vouuse your
Charisma whenever a spell refers toyour spellcasting
ability. In addition. you use your Charisma modifier
when setting the saving throw DC fora sorcerer spell
you cast and when making an attack roll with one.
SpellsaveDC~8 +yourproficiencybonus +
yourCharismamodifier
Spellattackmodifier~yourproficiencybonus +
yourCharismamodifierConverting aSpel1 S/ot to Sorcery Points. As a
bonus action on your turn, you can expend one spell
slot and gain a number ofsorcery points equal to the
slot's leveI.
METAMAGIC
At3rd levei,you gain the ability to twist your spells
to suit your needs. Vougain two ofthe following
Metamagic options ofyour choice. Vougain another one
at 10th and 17th leveI.
Voucan use only one Metamagic option on a spell
when you cast it,unless otherwise noted.
PART I (I 'SSES
101
102CAREFUL SPELL
When youcast aspell that forces other creatures tomake
asaving throw, you can protect some ofthose creatures
from the spell's fullforce. Todo50,youspend 1sorcery
point and choose anumber ofthose creatures uptoyour
Charisma modifier (minimum ofone creature). Achosen
creature automatically succeeds on its saving throw
against the spell.
DISTANT SPELL
When you cast a spell that has a range of 5feet ar
greater, you can spend 1sorcery point todouble the
range ofthe spell.
When you cast aspell that has a range oftouch, you
can spend 1sorcery point tomake the range ofthe
spell 30 feel.
EMPOWERED SPELL
When you roll damage foraspell, youcan spend 1
sorcery point toreroll a number ofthe damage dice up
toyour Charisma modifier (minimum ofone). Voumust
use the new rolls.
Voucan use Empowered Spell even ifyou have
already used a different Metamagic option during the
casting ofthe spell.
EXTENDED SPELL
When you cast aspell lhat has aduration of 1minute
ar longer. you can spend 1sorcery point todouble its
duration, toa maximum duration of24 hours.
HEIGHTENED SPELL
When youcast aspell lhat forces acreature tomake a
saving throw toresist itseffects, youcan spend 3sorcery
points togiveone target ofthe spell disadvantage onits
first saving throw made against the spell.
QUICKENED SPELL
When youcast aspell that has acasting time of 1action,
you can spend 2sorcery points tochange the casting
time to 1bonus action for this casting.
SUBTLE SPELL
When you cast aspell, you can spend 1sorcery point to
cast itwithout any somatic ar verbal components.
TWINNED SPELL
When youcast aspell that targets onlyone creature and
doesn't have arange ofself,you can spend anumber of
sorcery points equal tothe spell's leveitotarget asecond
creature inrange with the same spell (I sorcery point if
the spell isacantrip).
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei,you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by2,ar you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by I.As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
PART I ICLASSESSORCEROUS RESTORATION
At20th levei,you regain 4expended sorcery points
whenever you finish ashort resl.
SORCEROUS ORIGINS
Different sorcerers c1aimdifferent origins for their
innate magic. Although many variations exist, most
ofthese origins faliinto two categories: a draconic
bloodline and wild magic.
DRACONIC BLOODLINE
Vourinnate magic comes from draconic magic that was
mingled with your blood ar that ofyour ancestors. Most
often, sorcerers with this origin trace their descent
back toa mighty sorcerer ofancient times who made a
bargain with adragon ar who might even have c1aimed
adragon parenl. Some ofthese bloodlines are well
established inthe world, but most are obscure. Any
given sorcerer could be the first ofa new bloodline, as a
result ofapact ar some other exceptional circumstance.
DRAGON ANCESTOR
At 1stlevei,you choose one type ofdragon as your
ancestor. The damage type associated with each dragon
isused byfeatures you gain later.
DRACONIC ANCESTRY
Dragon DamageType
Black Acid
Blue Lightning
Brass Fire
Bronze Lightning
Copper Acid
Gold Fire
Green Poison
Red Fire
Silver Cold
White Cold
Voucan speak, read, and write Draconic. Additionally,
whenever you make a Charisma check when interacting
with dragons, your proficiency bonus isdoubled ifit
applies tothe check.
DRACONIC RESILIENCE
Asmagic f10wsthrough your body, itcauses physical
traits ofyour dragon ancestors toemerge. At 1stlevei,
your hit point maximum increases by 1and increases by
1again whenever you gain alevei inthis c1ass.
Additionally, parts ofyour skin are covered byathin
sheen ofdragon-Iike scales. When you aren't wearing
armar, your ACequals 13 +your Dexterity modifier.
ELEM ENTAL AFFIN ITY
Starting at 6th levei,when you cast aspell thal deals
damage ofthe type associated with your draconic
ancestry, add your Charisma modifier tothat damage.
Atthe same time, you can spend 1sorcery point togain
resistance tothat damage type for 1hour.
DRAGON WINGS
At 14thlevei,you gain the ability tosprout apair of
dragon wings from your back, gaining aflyingspeed
equal toyour current speed. Youcan create these wings
as abonus action onyour turnoThey last until you
dismiss them as abonus action onyour turno
Youcan't manifest your wings while wearing armor
unless the armor ismade toaccommodate them, and
clothing not made toaccommodate your wings might
bedestroyed when you manifest them.
DRACONIC PRESENCE
Beginning at 18th leveI,you can channel the dread
presence ofyour dragon ancestor, causing those around
you tobecome awestruck or frightened. Asan action,
you can spend 5sorcery points todraw on this power
and exude an aura ofawe or fear (your choice) toa
distance of60 feel. For I minute or until you lose your
concentration (as ifyou were casting aconcentration
spell), each hostile creature that starts itsturn inthis
aura must succeed on aWisdom saving throw or be
charmed (ifyou chose awe)or frightened (ifyouchose
fear) until the aura ends. Acreature that succeeds on
this saving throw isimmune toyour aura for24 hours.
WILDMAGIC
Yourinnate magic comes from the wild forces ofchaos
that underlie the order ofcreation. Youmight have
endured exposure tosome form ofraw magic, perhaps
through aplanar portalleading toLimbo, the Elemental
Planes, or lhe mysterious Far Realm. Perhaps you
were blessed byapowerful feycreature or marked bya
demon. Oryour magic could beaflukeofyour birth, with
noapparent cause or reason. However itcarne tobe,this
chaotic magic churns within you,waiting forany outlel.
WILD MAGIC SURGE
Starting when you choose this origin at 1stlevei,your
spellcasting can unleash surges ofuntamed magic.
lmmediately after you cast asorcerer spell of1stlevei
or higher, the DMcan have you roll ad20. Ifyou roll a
I, rollon the Wild Magic Surge table tocreate arandom
magical effect.
TIDES OF CHAOS
Starting at 1stlevei,you can manipulate the forces of
chance and chaos togain advantage on one attack roll,
ability check, or saving throw. Once you dosO.you must
6nish along rest before you can use this feature again.
Anytime before youregain the use oflhis feature, the
DMcan haveyou rollon the WildMagic Surge table
immediately after youcast asorcerer spell ofIst leveior
higher. Youthen regain the use ofthis feature.
BEND LUCK
Starting at 6th levei,you have the ability totwist fate
using your wild magic. When another creature you can
see makes an attack roll, an ability check, or asaving
throw, you can use your reaction and spend 2sorcery
points toroll Id4 and apply the number rolled as a
bonus or penalty (your choice) tothe creature's roll. Youcan doso after the creature rolls but before any effects
ofthe roll occur.
CONTROLLED CHAOS
At 14thlevei,you gain amodicum ofcontrol over the
surges ofyour wild magic. Whenever you rollon the
Wild Magic Surge table, you can rolltwice and use
either number.
SPELL BOMBARDMENT
Beginning at 18th leveI,the harmful energy ofyour
spells intensifies. When you roll damage foraspell and
roll the highest number possible on any oflhe dice,
choose one ofthose dice, roll itagain and add that roll to
the damage. Youcan use the feature onlyonce per turno
Effect
You castlevitate on yourself.
A unicorn controlled by the DM appears in a space
within 5 feet of you, then disappears 1 minute later.
You can't speak for the next minute. Whenever you
try, pink bubbles float out of your mouth.
A spectral shield hoversnear you for the next minute,
granting you a +2 bonus to AC and immunity to magic
missile.
You are immune to being intoxicated by alcohol for
the next 5d6 days.
Your hair falls out but grows back within 24 hours.
For the next minute, any flammable object you touch
that isn't being worn or carried by another creature
bursts into flame.
You regain your lowest.level expended spell 5101.
For the next minute, you must shout when you speak.
Youcastfog c10ud centered on yourself.
Up to three creatures you choose within 30 feet of you
take 4d10 lightning damage.
You are frightened by the nearest creature until the
end ofyour next turno
Each creature within 30 feet of you becomes invisible
for the next minute. lhe invisibility ends on a creature
when it atlacks or casts a spell.
You gain resistance to ali damage for the next minute.
A random creature within 60 feet of you becomes
poisoned for 1d4 hours.
You glow with bright light in a 30.foot radius for the
next minute. Any creature that ends its turn within 5
feet ofyou is blinded until the end ofits next turno
You castpo/ymorph on yourself. Ifyou fail the saving
throw, you turn into a sheep for the spell's duration.
IlIusory butlerflies and flower petals flutter in the air
within 10 feet of you for the next minute.
You can take one additional action immediately.
Each creature within 30 feet ofyou takes 1d10 necrotic
damage. You regain hit points equal to the sum of the
necrotic damage dealt.
Vou castmirror image.
You castf1y on a random creature within 60 feet ofyou.
You become invisible for the next minute. During that
time, other creatures can't hear you. lhe invisibility
ends if you atlack or cast a spell.
Ifyou die within the next minute, you immediately
come back to life as if by the reincarnate spell.
Your size increases by one size category for the next
minute.
You and ali creatures within 30 feet of you gain
vulnerability to piercing damage for the next minute.
You are surrounded by faint, ethereal music for the
next minute.
You regain ali expended sorcery points.71-72
73-7451-52
77-7875-7655-56
57-5853-54
97-98dl00
45-46
47-48
67-6849-50
91-9279-8069-7059-60
61-62
63-64
65-66
93-94
95-9685-86
87-88
89-9081-82
83-84
99-0027-28
37-3817-18
31-3229-30
33-3413-14
15-16
23-24
25-2607-08
09-10
11-12
35-3619-20
21-2205-06
39-40
41-4203-04
43-44~dv:::;::========================r~,
WILD MAGIC SURGE
dl00 Effect
01-02 RolI on this table at the start of each ofyour turns for
the next minute, ignoring this result on subsequent
rolls.
For the next minute, you can see any invisible creature
if you have line of sight to it.
A modron chosen and controlled by the DM appears
in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of you, then
disappears 1 minute later.
YoucastJireball as a 3rd.level spell centered on
yourself.
You castmagic missile as a 5th.level spell.
RolI a d10. Your height changes by a number ofinches
equal to the roll. If the roll is odd, you shrink. If the
roll iseven,you grow.
You castconfusion centered on yourself.
For the next minute, you regain 5 hit points at the
start of each of your turns.
You grow a long beard made of feathers that remains
until you sneeze, at which point the feathers explode
out from your face.
You castgreasecentered on yourself.
Creatures have disadvantage on saving throws against
the next spell you cast in the next minute that involves
a saving throw.
Your skin turns a vibrant shade ofblue. A remove curse
spell can end this effect.
An eye appears on your forehead for the next minute.
During that time, you have advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on sight.
For the next minute, ali your spells with a casting time
of 1 action have a casting time of 1 bonus action.
You teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space of
your choice that you can see.
You are transported to the Astral Plane until the
end of your next turn, after which time you return
to the space you previously occupied or the nearest
unoccupied space if that space is occupied.
Maximize the damage ofthe next damaging spell you
cast within the next minute.
RolI a d10. Your age changes by a number ofyears
equal to the roll. If the roll is odd, you get younger
(minimum 1 year old). Ifthe roll is even,you get older.
1d6 flumphs controlled by the DM appear in
unoccupied spaces within 60 feet of you and are
frightened of you. lhey vanish after 1 minute.
You regain 2d10 hit points.
You turn into a potled plant until the start of your
next turno While a plant, you are incapacitated and
have vulnerability to ali damage. Ifyou drop to O hit
points, your pot breaks, and your form reverts.
For the next minute, you can teleport up to 20 feet as
abonusaction oneachcfyourturns.
104
WARLOCK
Withapseudodragon curled onhisshoulder, ayoung
elfingolden robes smiles warmly, weaving amagical
charm intohishoneyed words and bending thepalace
sentinel tohiswill.
Asfiames spring tolifeinherhands, awizened
human whispers thesecret nameofherdemonic patron,
infusing herspell with fiendish magic.
Shifting hisgazebetween abattered tomeand the
oddalignment ofthestars overhead, awild-eyed tiefiing
chants the mystic ritual thatwillopen adoorway toa
distant world,
Warlocks are seekers oftheknowledge thatlies
hidden inthe fabricofthemultiverse, Through pacts
made with mysterious beings ofsupernatural power,
warlocks unlock magical effectsboth subtle and
spectacular. Drawing ontheancient knowledge of
beings such asfeynobles, demons, devils, hags, and
alien entities ofthe FarRealm, warlocks piece together
arcane secrets tobolster their ownpower,
SWORN AND BEHOLDEN
Awarlock isdefined byapactwithanotherworldly
being,Sometimes the relationship between warlock
and patron islikethatofac1erieand adeity,though
thebeings that serve aspatrons forwarlocks are not
gods,Awarlock might leadacultdedicated toademon
prince, anarchdevil, oranutterly alien entity-beings
nottypically served byc1erics,Moreoften, though, the
arrangement issimilar tothat between amaster and
anapprentice, Thewarlock learns and grows inpower,
atthecost ofoccasional services performed onthe
patron's behalf.
The magic bestowed onawarlock ranges fromminor
butlasting alterations tothewarlock's being (suchas
theabilitytosee indarkness ortoread anylanguage)
toaccess topowerful spells, Unlike bookish wizards,
warlocks supplement their magicwith some facility
athand-to-hand combat. Theyare comfortable inlight
armor and know howtousesimple weapons,
DELVERS INTO SECRETS
Warlocks are driven byaninsatiable need forknowledge
and power,which compels them intotheir pacts and
shapes their lives,This thirst drives warlocks intotheir
pacts and shapes their later careers aswell.
Stories ofwarlocks binding themselves tofiendsare
widelyknown, Sutmanywarlocks serve patrons that
are notfiendish. Sometimes atraveler inthewilds
comes toastrangely beautiful tower,meets itsfeylord
orlady,and stumbles intoapactwithout being fully
aware ofit.Andsometimes, while poring overtomes of
PART I ICLASSES
105
HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: ld8 per warlock levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 8 +your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ld8 (or 5) +your
Constitution 1Il0difierper warlock levei after 1stQUICK BUILD
Voucan make a warlock quickly byfollowing these
suggestions. First. Charisma should be your highest
ability score, followed byConstitution. Second, choose
the charlatan background. Third. choose the eldritch
blastandchill touch cantrips, along with the 1st-leveI
spellsray of sickness andwitch bolt.
CLASS FEATURES
As a warlock, YOllgain the following class features.Your patron's demands might drive you into adventures,
or they might consist entirely ofsmall favors you can do
between adventures.
What kind of relationship do you have with your
patron? Is itfriendly. antagonistic. uneasy. or romantic?
How important does your patron consider you to be?
What part do you play inyour patron's plans? Doyou
know other servants ofyour patron?
How does your patron communicate with you? If
you have a familiar, itmight occasionally speak with
your patron's voice. Some warlocks find messages
frolll their patrons etched on trees, mingled among tea
leaves, or adrift in the clouds-messages that only the
warlock can see. Other warlocks converse with their
patrons in dreams or waking visions, or deal only with
intermediaries.Proficieney Cantrips Spells Spell Slot Invocations
Levei Bonus Features Known Known Slots Levei Known
1st +2 Otherworldly Patron, Paet Magie 2 2 1 1st
2nd +2Eldriteh Invoeations 2 3 2 1st 2
3rd +2 Paet Boon 2 4 2 2nd 2
4th +2 Ability Seore Improvement 3 5 2 2nd 2
5th +3 3 6 2 3rd 3
6th +3 Otherworldly Patron feature 3 7 2 3rd 3
7th +3 3 8 2 4th 4
8th +3 Ability Seore Improvement 3 9 2 4th 4
9th +4 3 10 2 5th 5
10th +4 Otherworldly Patron feature 4 10 2 5th 5
11th +4 Mystie Areanum (6th levei) 4 11 3 5th 5
12th +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 11 3 5th 6
13th Mystie Areanum (7th levei) 4 12 3 5th 6
14th Otherworldly Patron feature 4 12 3 5th 6
15th Mystie Areanum (8th levei) 4 13 3 5th 7
16th Ability Seore Improvement 4 13 3 5th 7
17th Mystie Areanum (9th levei) 4 14 4 5th 7
18th 4 14 4 5th 8
19th 4 15 4 5th 8
20th 4 15 4 5th 8
forbidden lore. a brilliant but crazed student's mind is
opened to realities beyond the material world and to the
alien beings lhat dwell in the outer void.
Once a pact is made, awarlock's thirst for knowledge
and power can't be slaked with mere study and research.
No one makes a pact with such a mighty palron ifhe or
she doesn't intend to use the power thus gained. Rather,
the vast majority ofwarlocks spend their days in active
pursuit oftheir goals. which typically means some kind
ofadventuring. Furthermore, the demands oftheir
patrons drive warlocks toward adventure.
PART I ICLASSESCREATING AWARLOCK
As you make your warlock character, spend some time
thinking about your patron and the obligations that
your pact imposes upon you. What led you to make the
pact, and how did you make contact with your patron?
Wcrc you seduced into sumllloning a devi!, or did you
seek out the ritual thal would allow you to make contact
with an alien elder god? Didyou search foryour patron,
or did your patron find and choose you? Doyou chafe
under the obligations ofyour pact or serve joyfully in
anticipation ofthe rewards promised toyou?
Work with your DMto determine how big a part your
pact will play inyour character's adventuring career.
)06
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: Lighl armor
Weapons: Simple weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose lwo skills from Arcana,
Deceplion, Hislory, !nlimidalion, Invesligalion,
Nalure, and Religion
EQUIPMENT
Vouslarl wilh lhe following equipmenl, in addilion lo
lhe equipmenl granled byyour background:
(a)a lighl crossbow and 20 bo!ls or (b)any simple
weapon
(a)a componenl pouch or (b)an arcane focus
(a)a scholar's pack or (b)a dungeoneer's pack
Lealher armor, any simple weapon, and lwo daggers
OTHERWORLDLY PATRON
AI Isllevel, you have slruck a bargain wilh an
olherworldly being ofyour choice: lhe Archfey, lhe
Fiend, or lhe Greal Old One, each ofwhich is delailed
aI lhe end oflhe class descriplion, Your choice
granls you fealures aI Isllevel and again aI 61h, 101h,
and 141hleveI.
PACT MAGIC
Your arcane research and lhe magic beslowed on you
byyour palron have given you facilily wilh spells. See
chapter 10for lhe general rules ofspellcasling and
chapter 11for lhe warlock spelllisl.
CANTRIPS
Vouknow lwo canlrips ofyour choice from lhe warlock
spelllisl. Voulearn addilional warlock canlrips ofyour
choice aI higher leveis, as shown in lhe Canlrips Known
column oflhe Warlock lable.
SPELL SLOTS
The Warlock lable shows how many spell slols you have.
The lable also shows whallhe leveIoflhose slols is;ali
ofyour spell slols are lhe same leveI.Tocasl one ofyour
warlock spells of Isllevel or higher, you musl expend a
spell slol. Vouregain ali expended spell slols when you
finish a shorl or long resl.
For example, when you are 51hleveI,you have
lwo 3rd-level spell sioIs. To casllhe Isl-level spell
thunderwave, you musl spend one oflhose sioIs, and
you caSl ilas a 3rd-level spell.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HIGHER
AI Isllevel, you know lwo Isl-level spells ofyour choice
from lhe warlock spelllisl.
The Spells Known column oflhe Warlock lable shows
when you learn more warlock spells ofyour choice of ls1
levei and higher. Aspell you choose musl be ofa levei
no higher lhan whal's shown in lhe lable's Slol LeveI
column foryour leveI.When you reach 61hlevei, for
example, you learn a new warlock spell, which can be
ISI, 2nd, or 3rd leveI.Addilionally, when you gain a levei in this class,
you can choose one oflhe warlock spells you know
and replace ilwilh anolher spell from lhe warlock
spelllisl, which also musl be ofa leveIfor which you
have spell sioIs.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Charisma is your spellcasling abilily foryour warlock
spells, so you use your Charisma whenever a spell refers
loyour spellcasling abilily. In addition, you use your
Charisma modifier when selling lhe saving lhrow DC
for a warlock spell you casl and when making an allack
roll wilh one.
Spell saveDe=8+your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
Spell altack modifier =your proficiency bonus +
your Charisma modifier
SPELLCASTING Focus
Voucan use an arcane focus (found in chapler 5) as a
spellcasling focus foryour warlock spells.
ELDRITCH INVOCATIONS
In your sludy ofocculllore, you have unearlhed e!drilch
invocalions, fragmenls of forbidden knowledge lhal
imbue you wilh an abiding magical abilily.
AI2nd levei,you gain lwo eldrilch invocalions ofyour
choice. Your invocalion oplions are delailed aI lhe end
oflhe class descriplion. When you gain cerlain warlock
leveis, you gain addilional invocalions ofyour choice,
as shown in lhe lnvocalions Known column oflhe
Warlock lable.
Addilionally, when you gain a levei in lhis class,
you can choose one oflhe invocalions you know and
replace ilwilh anolher invocalion lhal you could learn
aI lhal leveI.
PACT BOON
AI 3rd levei,your olherworldly palron beslows a gifl
upon you foryour loyal service. Vougain one oflhe
following fealures ofyour choice.
PACT OF THE CHAIN
Voulearn lhe find familiar spell and can casl ilas a
rilual. The spell doesn'l counl againsl your number of
spells known.
When you casllhe spell, you can choose one oflhe
normal forms foryour familiar or one oflhe following
special forms: imp, pseudodragon, quasil, or sprile.
Additionally, when you lake lhe Allack aclion, you can
forgo one ofyour own allacks lo allow your familiar lo
make one allack ofils own.
PACT OF THE BLADE
Voucan use your aclion lo creale a pacl weapon in your
emply hand. Voucan choose lhe form thal this melee
weapon lakes each time you creale il(see chapler 5 for
weapon oplions). Vouare proficienl with ilwhile you
wield il.This weapon counls as magical for lhe purpose
ofovercoming resislance and immunily lo nonmagical
allacks and damage.
•••
108Yourpact weapon disappears ifitismore than 5feet
away from you for 1minute or more. Italso disappears
ifyou use this feature again. ifyou dismiss the weapon
(noaction required), or ifyou die,
Voucan transform one magic weapon intoyour pact
weapon byperforming aspecial ritual while you hold
the weapon. Vouperform the ritual overthe course
of 1hour, which can bedone during ashort rest.
Voucan then dismiss the weapon, shunting itinto an
extradimensional space, and itappears whenever you
create your pact weapon thereafter. Voucan't affect an
artifact or asentient weapon inthis way.The weapon
ceases being your pact weapon ifyou die, ifyou perform
the l.hour ritual on adifferent weapon, or ifyou use
a l.hour ritual tobreak your bond toit.The weapon
appears atyour feet ifitisinthe extradimensional space
when the bond breaks.
PACT OF THE TOME
Yourpatron givesyou agrimoire called aBook of
Shadows. When you gain this feature, choose three
cantrips from any class's spelllist. While the book ison
your person, you can cast those cantrips atwill. They
don't count against your number ofcantrips known.
[fyou loseyour Book ofShadows, you can perform
a l.hour ceremony toreceive areplacement fromyour
patrono This ceremony can be performed during ashort
or long rest, and itdestroys the previous book. The book
turns toash when you die.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th leveI.and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI,you can increase one ability score ofyour
choice by2,oryou can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
MYSTIC ARCANUM
At 11thlevei,your patron bestows upon you amagical
secret called an arca num. Choose one 6th-leveI spell
from the warlock spelllist as this arcanum.
Voucan cast your arcanum spell once without
expending aspell slot. Voumust finish along rest before
you can doso again.
Athigher leveIs,you gain more warlock spells ofyour
choice that can be cast inthis way:one 7th.level spell
at 13th leveI,one 8th.level spell at 15th levei,and one
9th-leveI spell at 17thleveI.Vouregain all uses ofyour
MysticArcanum when you finish along rest.
ELDRITCH MASTER
At20th leveI,you can draw onyour inner reserve of
mystical power while entreating your patron toregain
expended spell slots. Voucan spend 1minute entreating
your patron foraid toregain allyour expended spell slots
from your Pact Magic feature. Once youregain spell slots
with this feature, you must finish along rest before you
can doso again.
PART IICLASSES•••
YOUR PACT BOON
Each Pacl Boon oplion produces a special crealure or an
objecl thal refiecls your palron's nalure.
Pact ofthe Chain. Your familiar is more cunning than a
typical familiar. Ils defaull form can be a refieclion of your
palron, with spriles and pseudodragons tied to lhe Archfey
and imps and quasits lied to lhe Fiend. Because lhe Great Old
One's nalure is inscrulable, any familiar form is suitable for il.
Pact afthe 8lade. Ifyour patron is the Archfey, your
weapon mighl be a slender blade wrapped in leafy vines.
Ifyou serve the Fiend, your weapon could be an axe made
of black metal and adorned wilh decorative fiames. Ifyour
palron is lhe Greal Old One, your weapon mighl be an
ancienl.looking spear, wilh a gemslone embedded in ils
head, carved to look like a lerrible unblinking eye.
Pact ofthe Tome. Your Book ofShadows might be a fine,
gíll-edged lome wilh spells of enchanlmenl and illusion,
gifted lo you by lhe lordly Archfey. It could be a weighty tome
bound in demon hide sludded wilh iron, holding spells of
conjuralion and a weallh offorbidden lore aboul lhe sinisler
regions of lhe cosmos, a gíft of lhe Fiend. ar il could be lhe
tattered diary of a lunatic driven mad by conlact wilh the
Greal Old One, holding scraps of spells lhal only your own
burgeoning insanity allows you lo undersland and casl.
~ r
OTHERWORLDLY PATRONS
The beings that serve as patrons forwarlocks are
mighty inhabitants ofother planes ofexistence-not
gods, but almost godlike intheir power. Various patrons
givetheir warlocks access todifferent powers and
invocations, and expect significant favors inreturno
Some patrons collect warlocks, doling out mystic
knowledge relatively freely or boasting oftheir ability
tobind mortaIs totheir will. Other patrons bestow their
power only grudgingly, and might make apact with
onlyone warlock. Warlocks who serve the same patron
might view each other as allies, siblings, or rivaIs.
THEARCHFEY
Yourpatron isalord or ladyofthe fey,acreature of
legend who holds secrets that were forgotten before
the mortal races were born. This being's motivations
are often inscrutable, and sometimes whimsical, and
might involveastriving forgreater magical power or the
settling ofage-old grudges. Beings ofthis sort include
the Prince ofFrost; the Queen ofAir and Darkness,
ruler ofthe Gloaming Court; Titania ofthe Summer
Court; her consort Oberon, the Green Lord; Hyrsam,
the Prince ofFools; and ancient hags.
EXPANDED SPELL LIST
The Archfey lets you choose from an expanded list of
spells when you learn awarlock spell. The following
spells are added tothe warlock spelllist for YOU.
ARCHFEY EXPANDED SPELLS
Spell Levei Spells
1stfaerie fire, sleep
2ndcalm emotions, phantosmal force
3rdblink, plont growth
4thdominate beast, greater invisibility
5thdominate person, seeming
FIEND EXPANDED SPELlS
THE GREAT OLD ONEDARK ONE'S BLESSING
Starting at 1st levei,when you reduce a hostile creature
to Ohit points, you gain temporary hit points equal toyour
Charisma modifier +your warlock levei(minimum of 1).EXPANDED SPELL LIST
The Fiend lets you choose from an expanded list of
spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following
spells are added to the warlock spelllist forYOU.
Spells
burning hands, command
b/indnessjdeaJness, scorching roy
fireba//, stinking c10ud
fire shield, wa// oJfire
flame strike, ha//owSpelllevel
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
HURL THROUGH HELL
Starting at 14th leveI,when you hit a creature with an
attack, you can use this feature to instantly transport
the target through the lower planes. The creature
disappears and hurtles through a nightmare landscape.
Atthe end ofyour next turn, the target returns to the
space itpreviously occupied, or the nearest unoccupied
space. ]fthe target is not a fiend, ittakes IOdlO psychic
damage as itreels from its horrific experience.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a long rest.FIENDISH RESILIENCE
Starting at 10th leveI,you can choose one damage type
when you finish a short or long rest. Vougain resistance
to that damage type until you choose a different one
with this feature. Damage from magical weapons or
silver weapons ignores this resistance.DARK ONE'S OWN LUCK
Starting at 6th leveI,you can call on your patron to alter
fate inyour favor.When you make an ability check or a
saving throw, you can use this feature to add a dlO to
your roll. Voucan do so after seeing the initial roll but
before any of the roll's effects occur.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a short or long rest.FEY PRESENCE
Starting at 1st leveI,your patron bestows upon you the
ability to project the beguiling and fearsome presence
ofthe fey.As an action, you can cause each creature in
a 10-foot cube originating from you to make a Wisdom
saving throw against your warlock spell save DC. The
creatures that fail their saving throws are ali charmed
or frightened byyou (your choice) until the end of
your next turno
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a short or long rest.
DARK DELIRIUM
Starting at 14th leveI,you can plunge a creature into
an illusory realm. As an action, choose a creature
that you can see within 60 feet ofYOU.It must make a
Wisdom saving throw against your warlock spell save
DC. On a failed save, itis charmed or frightened byyou
(your choice) for 1minute or until your concentration
is broken (as ifyou are concentrating on a spell). This
effect ends early ifthe creature takes any damage.
Until this illusion ends, the creature thinks itis lost
in a misty realm, the appearance ofwhich you choose.
The creature can see and hear only itself, you, and
the illusion.
Voumust finish a short or long rest before you can
use this feature again.BEGUILING DEFENSES
Beginning at 10th levei,your patron teaches you how to
turn the mind-affecting magic ofyour enemies against
them. Vouare immune to being charmed, and when
another creature attempts to charm you, you can use
your reaction to attempt to turn the charm back on
that creature. The creature must succeed on a Wisdom
saving throw against your warlock spell save DC or
be charmed byyou for 1minute or until the creature
takes any damage.MISTY ESCAPE
Starting at 6th leveI,you can vanish in a puffofmist in
response to harm. When you take damage, you can use
your reaction to turn invisible and teleport up to 60 feet
to an unoccupied space you can see. Vouremain invisible
until the start ofyour next turn or until you attack or
cast a spell.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a short or long rest.
THE FIEND
Vouhave made a pact with a fiend from the lower
planes ofexistence, a being whose aims are evil,
even ifyou strive against those aims. Such beings
desire the corruption or destruction ofali things,
ultimately including you. Fiends powerful enough to
forge a pact include demon lords such as Demogorgon,
Orcus, Fraz'Urb-Iuu, and Baphomet; archdevils such
as Asmodeus, Dispater, Mephistopheles, and Belial;
pit fiends and balors that are especially mighty; and
ultroloths and other lords ofthe yugoloths.Vour patron is a mysterious entity whose nature is
utterly foreign to the fabric ofreality. It might come from
the Far Realm, the space beyond reality, or itcould be
one ofthe elder gods known only in legends. [ts motives
are incomprehensible to mortaIs, and its knowledge so
immense and ancient that even the greatest libraries
pale in comparison to the vast secrets itholds. The
Great Old One might be unaware ofyour existence
or entirely indifferent toyou, but the secrets YOllhave
learned allow YOllto draw YOllrmagic from it.
Entities ofthis type inclllde Ghallnadar, called That
Which Lllrks; Tharizdun, the Chained God; Dendar, the
Night Serpent; Zargon, the Retllrner; Great Cthlllhll;
and other unfathomable beings.
PART 1 (l .\SSES
°9
GREAT OlO ONE EXPANOEO SPEllSEXPANDED SPELL LIST
The Great OldOne lets you choose from an expanded list
ofspells when you learn awarlock spell. The following
spells are added to the warlock spelllist foryou.
THOUGHT SHIELD
Starting at 10th levei,your thoughts can't be read by
telepathy or other means unless you allow it.Voualso
have resistance topsychic damage, and whenever a
creature deals psychic damage toyou, that creature
takes the same amount ofdamage that you do.AWAKENED MIND
Starting at 1st levei,your alien knowledge gives you
the ability to touch the minds ofother creatures. Vou
can communicate telepathically with any creature you
can see within 30 feet ofyou. Voudon't need toshare
a language with the creature for itto understand your
telepathic utterances, but the creature must be able to
understand at least one language.BEWITCHING WHISPERS
Prerequisite: 7th leveI
Voucan cast compulsion once using awarlock spell slot.
Voucan't do so again until you finish a long rest.
BOOK OF ANCIENT SECRETS
Prerequisite: Pact of the Tome feature
Voucan now inscribe magical rituais inyour Book of
Shadows. Choose two 1st-leveIspells that have the
ritual tag fram any c1ass's spelllist. The spells appear
in the book and don't count against the number ofspells
you know. With your Book ofShadows in hand, you
can cast the chosen spells as rituais. Voucan't cast the
spells except as rituais, unless you've learned them by
some other means. Voucan also cast awarlock spell
you know as a ritual ifithas the ritual tag.
On your adventures, you can add other ritual spells to
your Book ofShadows. When you find such a spell, you
can add ittothe book ifthe spell's levei is equal to or
less than half your warlock leveI(rounded up)and ifyou
can spare the time to transcribe the spell. For each levei
ofthe spell, the transcription process takes 2hours and
costs 50 gp for the rare inks needed to inscribe it.BEGUILING INFLUENCE
Vougain proficiency in the Deception and
Persuasion skills.BEAST SPEECH
Voucan cast speak with animaIs at will, without
expending aspell slot.ASCENDANT STEP
Prerequisite: 9th leveI
Voucan cast levitateonyourself at will, without
expending a spell slot or material components.ARMOR OF SHADOWS
Voucan cast mage armor on yourself at will, without
expending a spell slot or material components.
Spells
dissonant whispers, Tasha's hideous /aughter
detect thoughts, phantasma/ force
elairvoyance, sending
dominate beast, Evard's b/ack tentaeles
dominate person, telekine,i,Spelllevel
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
ENTROPIC WARD
At6th levei,you learn tomagically ward yourself against
attack and to turn an enemy's failed strike into good
luck foryourself, When a creature makes an attack
roll against you, you can use your reaction to impose
disadvantage on that roll. ]fthe attack misses you, your
next attack roll against the creature has advantage ifyou
make itbefore the end ofyour next turno
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a short or long resto
CREATE THRALL
At 14th levei,you gain the ability to infect a humanoid's
mind with the alien magic ofyour patrono Voucan use
your action to touch an incapacitated humanoid. That
creature is then charmed byyou until a remove curse
spell is cast on it,the charmed condition is removed
from it,oryou use this feature again.
Voucan communicate telepathically with the charmed
creature as long as the two Dfyou are on the same plane
Dfexistence.
ELDRITCH INVOCATIONS
Ifan eldritch invocation has prerequisites, you must
meet them to learn it.Voucan learn the invocation at the
same time that you meet its prerequisites.CHAINS OF CARCERI
Prerequisite: 15th leveI, Pactofthe Chain feature
Voucan cast hold monster at will-targeting a celestial,
fiend, or elemental-without expending a spell slot or
material components. Voumust finish a long rest before
you can use this invocation on the same creature again.
DEVIL'S SIGHT
Voucan see normally in darkness, both magical and
nonmagical, to a distance Df120 feet.
DREADFUL WORD
Prerequisite: 7th leveI
Voucan cast confusion once using awarlock spell slol.
Voucan't do so again until you finish a long rest.
AGONIZING BLAST
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip
When you cast eldritch blast, add your Charisma
modifier to the damage itdeals on a hit.ELDRITCH SIGHT
Voucan cast detect magic at will, without expending
a spell slot.
110I'ART 1ICLASSES
ELDRITCH SPEAR
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip
When you cast eldritch blast, its range is 300 feel.
EYES OF THE RUNE KEEPER
VOUcan read ali writing.
FIENDISH VIGOR
VOUcan cast false /ifeon yourself at will as a
1st-leveispell, without expending a spell slot or
material components.
GAZE OF Two MINDS
VOUcan use your action to touch a willing humanoid
and perceive through its senses until the end ofyour
next turnoAs long as the creature is on the same
plane ofexistence as you, you can use your action
on subsequent turos to maintain this connection,
extending the duration until the end ofyour next turno
While perceiving through the other creature's senses,
you benefit from any special senses possessed bythat
creature, and you are blinded and deafened toyour own
surroundings.
LIFEDRIN KER
Prerequisite: 12th leveI, Pact oflhe 81ade fcature
When you hit a creature with your pact weapon, the
creature takes extra necrotic damage equal toyour
Charisma modifier (minimum 1).
MASK OF MANY FACES
VOUcan cast disguise self at will, without expending
a spell slol.
MASTER OF MYRIAD FORMS
Prerequisile: 15th leveI
Voucan cast alter selfat will, without expending
a spell slol.
MINIONS OF CHAOS
Prerequisite: 9th leveI
Voucan cast conjure elemenlal once using a
warIock spell slol. Voucan't do so again until you
finish a long resl.
MIRE THE MIND
Prerequisite: 5th leveI
Voucan cast slowonce using awarIock spell slol. Vou
can't do so again until you finish a long resl.
MISTY VISIONS
VOUcan cast silenl image at wilI,without expending a
spell slot or material components.
ONE WITH SHADOWS
Prerequisite: 5th leveI
When you are in an area ofdim light or darkness, you
can use your action to become invisible until you move
artake ao acHa0 ar a reaction.OTHERWORLDLY LEAP
Prerequisite: 9th leveI
Voucan castjump on yourself at \ViII,\Vithout expending
a spell slot or material components.
REPELLING BLAST
Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip
When you hit a creature with eldritch blast. you can push
the creature up to 10feetaway from you in astraight line.
SCULPTOR OF FLESH
Prerequisite: 7thleveI
Voucan cast polymorph once using a warIock spell slol.
Voucan't do so again until you finish a long resl.
SIGN OF ILL OMEN
Prerequisite: 5th leveI
Voucan cast bestow curse once using a warIock spell
slol. Voucan't do so again until you finish a long resl.
THIEF OF FIVE FATES
VOUcan cast baneonce using a warIock spell slot. Vou
can't do so again until YOIIfinish a long resl.
THIRSTING BLADE
Prerequisite: 5th leveI, Pact of the 81ade feature
Voucan attack with your pact weapon t\Vice.instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your tllrn.
VISIONS OF DISTANT REALMS
Prerequisite: 15th levei
Voucan cast arcane eye at wilI, without expending
a spell slot.
VOICE OF THE CHAIN MASTER
Prerequisite: Pact ofthe Chain feature
Voucan communicate teIepathically with your familiar
and perceive through your familiar's senses as long as
you are on the same plane ofexistence. Additionally,
while perceiving through your familiar's senses, you can
also speak through your familiar inyour own voice, evcn
ifyour familiar is normally incapable ofspeech.
WHISPERS OF THE GRAVE
Prerequisite: 9th levei
Voucan cast speak with dead at wilI, without expending
a spell slot.
WITCH SIGHT
Prerequisite: 15th leveI
Voucan see the true form ofany shapechanger or
creature concealed byillusion or transmutation magic
while the creature iswithin 30 feet ofyou and within
line ofsighl.
PARf 1 (l SE
112PART 1 ICLASSESWIZARD
Clad in the silver robes that denote her station, an
elf closes her eyes to shut out the distractions ofthe
battletield and begins her quiet chant. Fingers weaving
in front ofher, she completes her spell and launches a
tiny bead oftire toward the enemy ranks, where iterupts
into a confiagration that engulfs the soldiers.
Checking and rechecking his work, a human scribes
an intricate magic circle in chalk on the bare stone
fioor,then sprinkles powdered iron along every line and
graceful curve. When the circle is complete, he drones a
long incantation. Ahole opens in space inside the circle,
bringing a whiff ofbrimstone from the otherworldly
plane beyond.
Crouching on the fioor in a dungeon intersection, a
gnome tosses a handful ofsmall bones inscribed with
mystic symbols, muttering a few words ofpower over
them. Closing his eyes to see the visions more clearly,
he nods slowly, then opens his eyes and points down the
passage to his left.
Wizards are supreme magic-users, detined and united
as a class bythe spells they cast. Drawing on the subtle
weave ofmagic that permeates the cosmos, wizards cast
spel1s ofexplosive tire, arcing lightning, subtle deception,
and brute.force mind control. Their magic conjures
monsters from other planes ofexistence, glimpses the
future, or turns slain foes into zombies. Their mightiest
spel1s change one substance into another, cal1meteors
down from the sky, or open portaIs to other worlds.
SCHOLARS OF THEARCANE
Wild and enigmatic, varied in form and function, the
power ofmagic draws students who seek to master
its mysteries. Some aspire to become like the gods,
shaping reality itself. Though the casting ofa typical
spel1 requires merely the utterance ofa few strange
words, fieeting gestures, and sometimes a pinch or
clump ofexotic materiaIs, these surface components
barely hint at the expertise attained after years of
apprenticeship and countless haurs ofstudy.
Wizards liveand die bytheir spel1s. Everything else
is secondary. They learn new spel1s as they experiment
and grow in experience. They can also learn them fram
other wizards, from ancient tomes or inscriptions,
and from ancient creatures (such as the fey)that are
steeped in magic.
Preficiency Cantrips-Spells Slets per Spell Level-
LeveiBonus Features Known 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
1st +2Spelleasting, Areane Reeevery 3 2
2nd +2Areane Traditien 3 3
3rd +2 3 4 2
4th +2Ability Score Improvement 4 4 3
5th +3 44 3 2
6th +3Areane Traditien feature 4 4 3 3
7th +3 44 3 31
8th +3Ability Seere Improvement 4 4 3 3 2
9th +4 4 4 3 3 3 1
~•..10th +4 Areane Traditien feature 5 4 3 3 3 2
11th +4 5 4 3 3 3 2 1
12th +4Ability Seere Improvement 543 3 3 2 1
13th +5 5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
14th +5Areane Tradition feature 543 3 3 2 1 1
15th +5 5 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
16th +5Ability Seore Improvement 543 3 32 1 1
17th +6 5 4 333 2 1 1
18th +6Spell Mastery 5 4 33 3 3 1 1
19th +6Ability Seore Improvement 54333321
20th +6Signature Spell 5 4 3 3 3 3 2 2
THE LURE OF KNOWLEDGE
Wizards' lives are seldom mundane, The dosest a
wizard is likely to come to an ordinary life is working
as a sage or lecturer in a library or university, teaching
others the secrets of the multiverse. Other wizards sell
their services as diviners, serve in military forces, or
pursue lives of crime or domination.
But the lure of knowledge and power calls even the
most unadventurous wizards out of the safety of their
libraries and laboratories and into crumbling ruins and
lost cities. Most wizards believe that their counterparts
in ancient civilizations knew secrets of magic that have
been lost to the ages, and discovering those secrets
could unlock the path to a power greater than any magic
available in the present age.
CREATING AWIZARD
Creating a wizard character demands a backstory
dominated by at least one extraordinary event. How
did your character first come into contact with magic?
How did you discover you had an aptitude for it? Do
you have a natural talent, or did you simply study
hard and practice incessantly? Did you encounter a
magical creature or an ancient tome that taught you the
basics of magic?
What drew you forth from your life of study? Did your
first taste of magical knowledge leave you hungry for
more? Have you received word of a secret repository
of knowledge not yet plundered by any other wizard?
Perhaps you're simply eager to put your newfound
magical skills to the test in the face of danger.QUICK BUILD
Vou can make a wizard quickly by following these
suggestions. First, Intelligence should be your highest
ability score, followed by Constitution or Dexterity.
Ifyou plan to join the School of Enchantment, make
Charisma your next-best score. Second, choose the sage
background. Third, choose the mage hand, light, and
rayaffrost cantrips, alang with the fallowing 1st-leveI
spells for your spellboak: burning hands, eharm persan,
feather fali,mage armar. magie missi/e, ands/eep.
CLASS FEATURES
As a wizard, yau gain the follawing dass features.
HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d6 per wizard leveI
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 6 + your Canstitutian modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: 1d6 (or 4) + your
Constitution modifier per wizard leveI after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: None
Weapons: Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs.
light crossbows
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Intelligenee, Wisdom
Skills: Choose two from Areana, History, Insight,
Investigation, Medicine, and Religion
PART I CLASSES
113
••
111-EQUIPMENT
Voustart with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted byyour baekground:
(a)a quarterstaff or (b)a dagger
(a)a eomponent poueh or (b)an areane foeus
(a)a seholar's paek or (b)an explorer's paek
Aspellbook
SPELLCASTING
As a student ofareane magic, you have a spellbook
eontaining spells that show the first glimmerings of
your true power, See ehapter 10forthe general rules of
spelleasting and ehapter 11forthe wizard spelllist.
CANTRIPS
At 1stleveI,you know three eantrips ofyour ehoice
from the wizard spelllist. Voulearn additional wizard
eantrips ofyour ehoice at higher leveIs, as shown in the
Cantrips Known eolumn ofthe Wizard table,
4 •
YOUR SPELLBOOK
The spells that Vou add to your spellbook as Vou gain leveis
refiect the arcane research Vou conduct on your own, as well
as intellectual breakthroughs Vou have had about the nature
ofthe multiverse. You might find other spells during your
adventures. You could discover a spell recorded on a scroll in
an evil wizard's chest, for example, or in a dusty tome in an
ancient library.
Copy;ng aSpell ;nlo lhe Book. When Vou find a wizard spell
of 1st levei or higher, Voucan add it to your spellbook ifit is
of a levei for which Vou have spell slots and ifVou can spare
the time to decipher and copy il.
Copying a spell into your spellbook involves reproducing
the basic form of the spell, then deciphering the unique
system of notation used bythe wizard who wrote il.You
must practice the spell until Vou understand the sounds
or gestures required, then transcribe it into your spellbook
using your own notation.
For each levei of the spell, the process takes 2 hours and
costs 50 gp. The cost represents material components Vou
expend as Vouexperiment with the spell to master it, as well
as the fine inks Vou need to record il. Once Vou have spent
this time and money, Vou can prepare the spell just like your
other spells.
Replacing lhe Book. You can copy a spell from your own
spellbook into another book-for example, ifVouwant
to make a backup copy of your spellbook. This is just like
copying a new spell into your spellbook, but faster and easier,
since Vou understand your own notation and already know
how to cast the spell. You need spend only 1 hour and 10 gp
for each levei of the copied spell.
IfVou lose your spellbook, Vou can use the same procedure
to transcribe the spells that Vou have prepared into a new
spellbook. Filling out the remainder of your spellbook
requires Vouto find new spells to do so, as normal. For this
reason, many wizards keep backup spellbooks in a safe place.
The Book'sAppea,ance. Your spellbook is a unique
compilation af spells, with itsown decorative f10urishesand
margin notes. It might be a plain, functionalleather volume
that Vou received as a gift from your master, a finely bound
gilt-edged tome Vou found in an ancient library, or even a
loose collection of notes scrounged together afler Vou lost
your previous spellbook in a mishap.••
PART IICLASSESSPELLBOOK
At 1st leveI.you have aspellbook eontaining six 1st-levei
wizard spells ofyour ehoice.
PREPARING ANO CASTING SPELLS
The Wizard lable shows how many spell slots you have
toeast your spells of 1st leveIand higher. Toeast one of
these spells, you must expend aslol ofthe spelJ's leveI
or higher. Vouregain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
Vouprepare the Iist ofwizard spells that are available
foryou toeast. Todo so, ehoose a number ofwizard
spells from your spellbook equal toyour Intelligenee
modifier+your wizard leveI(minimum ofone spell). The
spells must be ofa leveIforwhieh you have spell slots.
For example, ifyou're a 3rd-level wizard, you have
four 1st-leve!and two 2nd-levei spell slots. With an
lntelligenee of 16,your list ofprepared spells ean
include six spells of 1stor 2nd leveI,in any eombination,
ehosen from your spellbook. Ifyou prepare the 1st-levei
spellmagie missiJe, you ean east itusing a 1st-Ievelor a
2nd-levei slot. Casting lhe spell doesn't remove itfrom
your Iist ofprepared spells.
Vouean ehange your list ofprepared spells when
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list ofwizard
spells requires time spent studying your spellbook and
memorizing the ineantations and gestures you must
make toeast the spell: aIleast 1minute per spelllevel
foreaeh spell on your Iist.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
lntelligenee isyour spelleasting abilily foryour wizard
spells, sinee you learn your spells through dedieated
study and memorization. Vouuse your Intelligenee
whenever a spell refers toyour spel1casting ability.
In addition, you use your Inlelligenee modifier when
setting the saving throw DC fora wizard spell you east
and when making an attaek roll with one.
Spell saveDe=8+your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
Spell attack modifier =your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
RITUAL CASTING
Vouean east awizard spell as a ritual ifthat spell has
the ritual tag and you have the spell inyour spellbook.
Voudon't need to have the spell prepared.
SPELLCASTING Focus
Vouean use an areane foeus (found in ehapler 5)as a
spelleasting foeus foryour wizard spells.
LEARNING SPELLS OF 1sT LEVEL ANO HIGHER
Eaeh time you gain a wizard leveI,you ean add two
wizard spells ofyour ehoiee toyour spellbook. Eaeh
ofthese spells must be ofa leveIforwhieh you have
spell slots, as shown on lhe Wizard table. On your
advenlures, you might find other spells lhat you ean add
toyour spellbook (see the "Your Spellbook" sidebar).
ARCANE RECOVERY
Vouhave learned toregain some ofyour magical energy
bystudying your spellbook. Once per daywhen you
finish ashort rest, youcan choose expended spell slots
torecover. The spell slots can have acombined leveIthat
isequal toor less than halfyour wizard leveI(rounded
up),and none ofthe slots can be 6th leveIor higher.
Forexample, ifyou're a4th-leveIwizard, youcan recover
uptotwoleveIsworth ofspell slots.Voucan recover either
a2nd-leveI spell slot or two 1st-leveispell slots.
ARCANE TRADITION
When you reach 2nd levei,you choose an arcane
tradition, shaping your practice ofmagic through one
ofeight schools: Abjuration, Conjuration, Oivination,
Enchantment, Evocation, lllusion, Necromancy,
or Transmutation, alidetailed atthe end ofthe
class description.
Yourchoice grants you features at 2nd leveIand again
at 6th, 10th, and 14thleveI.
ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT
When you reach 4th levei,and again at8th, 12th. 16th,
and 19th leveI,youcan increase one ability score ofyour
choice by2,oryoucan increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1.Asnormal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.
SPELL MASTERY
At 18th leveI,you have achieved such mastery over
certain spells that you can cast them atwill. Choose a
1st-leveiwizard spell and a2nd.level wizard spell that
are inyour spellbook. Voucan cast those spells at their
lowest leveIwithout expending aspell slot when you
have them prepared. 1£you want tocast either spell at a
higher leveI,you must expend aspell slot as normal.
Byspending 8 hours instudy, you can exchange one
or both ofthe spells you chose fordifferent spells of
the same leveIs.
SIGNATURE SPELLS
When you reach 20th levei,you gain mastery overtwo
powerful spells and can cast them with little effort.
Choose two 3rd.level wizard spells inyour spellbook
asyour signature spells. Voualways have these spells
prepared, they don't count against the number ofspells
you have prepared, and youcan cast each ofthem once at
3rd leveIwithout expending aspell slot.When youdoso,
youcan't dosoagain until you finish ashort orlong rest.
1£youwant tocast either spell at ahigher leveI,you
must expend aspell slot as normal.
ARCANE TRADITIONS
The study ofwizardry isancient, stretching back to
the earliest mortal discoveries ofmagic. Itisfirmly
established inthe worlds of 0&0,with various
traditions dedicated toitscomplex study.
The most common arcane traditions inthe multiverse
revolve around the schools ofmagic. Wizards throughthe ages have cataloged thousands ofspells, grouping
them intoeight categories called schools, as described
inchapter 10.In some places, these traditions are
literally schools; awizard might study at the School of
lllusion while another studies across town at the School
ofEnchantment. Inother institutions, the schools are
more like academic departments, with rival faculties
competing forstudents and funding. Even wizards who
train apprentices inthe solitude oftheir own towers use
the division ofmagic into schools as alearning device,
since the spells ofeach school require mastery of
different techniques.
SCHOOL OF ABJURATION
The School ofAbjuration emphasizes magic that blocks,
banishes, or protects. Oetractors ofthis school say
that its tradition isabout denial, negation rather than
positive assertion. Vouunderstand, however, that ending
harmful effects, protecting the weak, and banishing evil
influences isanything but aphilosophical void.Itisa
proud and respected vocation.
Called abjurers, members ofthis school are sought
when baleful spirits require exorcism, when important
locations must be guarded against magical spying, and
when portaIs toother planes ofexistence must beclosed.
ABJURATION SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd leveI,the
gold and time you must spend tocopyan abjuration
spell intoyour spellbook ishalved.
ARCANE WARD
Starting at2nd levei,you can weave magic around
yourself forprotection. When youcast an abjuration
spell ofIst leveIor higher, youcan simultaneously use a
strand ofthe spell's magic tocreate amagical ward on
yourself that lasts until you finish along rest. The ward
has hitpoints equal totwice your wizard leveI +your
Intelligence modifier. Whenever youtake damage, the
ward takes the damage instead. lfthis damage reduces
the ward toOhitpoints, you take anyremaining damage.
While the ward has Ohit points, itcan't absorb
damage, but itsmagic remains. Whenever youcast an
abjuration spell of 1stleveIor higher, the ward regains a
number ofhit points equal totwice the leveIofthe spell.
Once you create the ward, you can't create itagain
until you finish along resto
PROJECTED WARD
Starting at6th leveI.when acreature that you can see
within 30 feet ofyou takes damage, you can use your
reaction tocause your Arcane Ward toabsorb that
damage. Ifthis damage reduces the ward to Ohit points,
the warded creature takes any remaining damage.
IMPROVED ABJURATION
Beginning at 10th leveI,when youcast an abjuration
spell that requires you tomake an ability check as
apart ofcasting that spell (as in counterspell and
dispel magic), you addyour proficiency bonus tolhat
ability check.
PARl I (I <\SSfS
li
116SPELL RESISTANCE
Starting at 14th leveI,you have advantage on saving
throws against spells.
Furthermore, you have resistance against the
damage ofspells.
SCHOOL OF CONJURATION
As a conjurer, you favor spells that produce objects
and creatures out ofthin air. Voucan conjure billowing
clouds ofkilling fogor summon creatures from
elsewhere to fight on your behalf. As your mastery
grows, you learn spells oftransportation and can
teleport yourself across vast distances, even to other
planes ofexistence, in an instan!.
CONJURATION SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd leveI, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a conjuration spell
into your spellbook is halved.
MINOR CONJURATION
Starting at 2nd leveIwhen you select this school, you
can use your action to conjure up an inanimate object
inyour hand or on the ground in an unoccupied space
that you can see within 10feet ofyou. This object can be
no larger than 3 feet on a side and weigh no more than
10pounds, and its form must be that ofa nonmagical
PART I ICLASSESobject that you have seen. The object is visibly magical,
radiating dim light out to 5 fee!.
The object disappears after 1hour, when you use this
feature again, or ifittakes any damage.
BENIGN TRANSPOSITION
Starting at 6th leveI,you can use your action to teleport
up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space that you can see.
Alternatively, you can choose a space within range
that is occupied bya Small or Medium creature. ]fthat
creature is willing, you both teleport, swapping places.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain until
you finish a long rest or you cast a conjuration spell of
1st levei or higher.
FOCUSED CONJURATION
Beginning at 10th leveI,while you are concentrating on
a conjuration spell, your concentration can't be broken
as a result oftaking damage.
DURABLE SUMMONS
Starting at 14th leveI, any creature that you
summon or create with a conjuration spell has 30
temporary hit points.
SCHOOL OF DIVINATION
The counsel ofa diviner is sought byroyalty and
commoners alike, for ali seek a clearer understanding
ofthe past, present, and future. As a diviner, you strive
to part the veils ofspace, time, and consciousness so
that you can see clearly. Vouwork to master spells of
discernment, remote viewing, supernatural knowledge,
and foresight.
DIVINATION SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a divination spell
into your spellbook is halved.
PORTENT
Starting at 2nd levei when you choose this school,
glimpses ofthe future begin to press in on your
awareness. When you finish a long rest, roll two d20s
and record the numbers rolled. Voucan replace any
attack roll, saving throw, or ability check made byyou or
a creature that you can see with one ofthese foretelling
rolls. Voumust choose to do so before the roll, and you
can replace a roll in this way only once per turno
Each foretelling roll can be used only once. When you
finish a long rest, you lose any unused foretelling rolls.
EXPERT DIVINATION
Beginning at 6th leveI,casting divination spells comes
so easily to you that itexpends only a fraction ofyour
spellcasting efforts. When you cast a divination spell
of 2nd leveIor higher using a spell slot, you regain one
expended spell slo!. The slot you regain must be ofa
levellower than the spell you cast and can't be higher
than 5th leveI.
THE THIRD EYE
Starting at 10th levei,you can use your action to
increase your powers ofperception. When you do so,
choose one of the following benefits, which lasts until
you are incapacitated or you take a short or long rest.
Vou can't use the feature again until you finish a rest.
Darkvision. Vou gain darkvision out to a range of 60
feet, as described in chapter 8.
Ethereal Si{jht. Vou can see into the Ethereal Plane
within 60 feet ofyou.
Greater Comprehension. Voucan read any language.
SeeInvisibility. Voucan see invisible creatures and
objects within 10 feet ofyou that are within line of sight.
GREATER PORTENT
Starting at 14th levei, the visions in your dreams
intensify and paint a more accurate picture in your mind
of what is to come. Vou roll three d20s for your Portent
feature, rather than two.
SCHOOLOFENCHANTMENT
As a member of the School of Enchantment, you have
honed your ability to magically entrance and beguile
other people and monsters. Some enchanters are
peacemakers who bewitch the violent to lay down their
arms and charm the cruel into showing mercy. Others
are tyrants who magically bind the unwilling into their
service. Most enchanters fall somewhere in between.
ENCHANTMENT SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy an enchantment
spell into your spellbook is halved.
HYPNOTIC GAZE
Starting at 2nd levei when you choose this school, your
soft words and enchanting gaze can magically enthrall
another creature. As an action, choose one creature that
you can see within 5 feet ofyou. ]f the target can see or
hear you, it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw
against your wizard spell save DC or be charmed byyou
until the end ofyour next turno The charmed creature's
speed drops to O,and the creature is incapacitated and
visibly dazed.
On subsequent turns, you can use your action to
maintain this effect, extending its duration until the
end ofyour next turno However, the effect ends ifyou
move more than 5 feet away from the creature, if the
creature can neither see nor hear you, or if the creature
takes damage.
Once the effect ends, or if the creature succeeds on its
initial saving throw against this effect, you can't use this
feature on that creature again until you finish a long rest.
INSTINCTIVE CHARM
Beginning at 6th levei, when a creature you can see
within 30 feet ofyou makes an attack roll against
you, you can use your reaction to divert the attack,
provided that another creature is within the attack's
range. The attacker must make a Wisdom saving throw
against your wizard spell save De. On a failed save,
the attacker must target the creature that is dosest
lo il, not including you or itself. If multiple creatures
are dosest, lhe attacker chooses which one to target.On a successful save, you can't use this feature on the
attacker again until you finish a long rest.
Vou must choose to use this feature before knowing
whether the attack hits or misses. Creatures that can't
be charmed are immune to this effect.
SPLIT ENCHANTMENT
Starting at 10th levei, when you cast an enchantment
spell of 1st levei or higher that targets only one creature,
you can have it target a second creature.
ALTER MEMORIES
At 14th levei, you gain the ability to make a creature
unaware of your magical influence on it. When you cast
an enchantment spell to charm one or more creatures,
you can alter one creature's understanding so that it
remains unaware of being charmed.
Additionally, once before the spell expires, you can
use your action lOtry to make the chosen creature
forget some of the time it spent charmed. The creature
must succeed on an Intelligence saving throw against
your wizard spell save DC or lose a number of hours
of its memories equal to 1 +your Charisma modifier
(minimum 1).Voucan make the creature forget less
time, and the amount of time can't exceed thc duration
ofyour enchantment spell.
SCHOOL OF EVOCATION
Vou focus your study on magic that creates powerful
elemental effects sueh as bitter cold, searing flame,
rolling thunder, crackling lightning, and burning acid.
Some evokers find employment in military forces,
serving as artillery to blast enemy armies from afar.
Others use their spectacular power to protect the weak,
while some seek their own gain as bandits, adventurers,
or aspiring tyrants.
EVOCATION SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy an evocation spell
into your spellbook is halved.
SCULPT SPELLS
Beginning at 2nd levei, you can create pockets of
reIative safety within the effects ofyour evocation spclls.
When you cast an evocation spell that affects other
creatures that you can see, you can choose a number
of them equal to 1 +the spell's leveI.The chosen
creatures automatically succeed on their saving throws
against the spell, and they take no damage if they would
normally take half damage on a successful save.
POTENT CANTRIP
Starting at 6th levei, your damaging cantrips affect
even creatures that avoid the brunt of the effect. When
a creature succeeds on a saving throw against your
cantrip, the creature takes half the cantrip's damage (if
any) but suffers no additional effect from the cantrip.
EMPOWERED EVOCATION
Beginning at 10th leveI,you can add your Intelligence
modifier to the damage roll of any wizard evocation
spell you cast.
PART IICI ASSES
lI'
118OVERCHANNEL
Starting at 14thlevei,youcan increase the power of
your simpler spells. When you cast awizard spell of
5th leveiar lower that deals damage, you can deal
maximum damage with that spell.
The first time you doso,you suffer noadverse effect.
Ifyou use this feature again before you finish along
rest, you take 2d12necrotic damage foreach leveiof
the spell, immediately after you cast it.Each time you
use this feature again before finishing along rest, the
necrotic damage per spelllevel increases by ldl2. This
damage ignores resistance and immunity.
SCHOOL OF ILLUSION
Voufocus your studies on magic that dazzles the
senses, befuddles the mind, and tricks even the wisest
folk.Yourmagic issubtle, but the ilIusions crafted by
your keen mind make the impossible seem real. Some
illusionists-including many gnome wizards-are
benign tricksters who use their spells toentertain.
Others are more sinister masters ofdeception, using
their ilIusions tofrighten and foolothers for their
personal gain.
ILLUSION SAVANT
Beginning when you se1ectthis school at 2nd levei,the
goldand time you must spend tocopyan illusion spell
intoyour spellbook ishalved.
IMPROVED MINOR ILLUSION
When you choose this school at 2nd levei,you learn
theminor illusion cantrip. lfyou already know this
cantrip, you learn adifferent wizard cantrip ofyour
PART 1ICLASSESchoice. The cantrip doesn't count against your number
ofcantrips known.
When you cast minar illusian, yau can createbatha
saund and an image with asingle casting ofthe spell.
MALLEABLE ILLUSIONS
Starting at 6th levei,when you cast an illusion spell that
has aduration of 1minute or longer, youcan use yaur
action tochange the nature ofthat illusion (using the
spell's normal parameters forlhe illusion), provided that
you can see the illusion.
ILLUSORY SELF
Beginning at 10th levei,you can create an illusory
duplicate ofyourself as an instant, almost instinctual
reaction todanger. When acreature makes an attack
rollagainst you,you can use your reaction tointerpose
the illusory duplicate between the attacker and
yourself. The attack automatically misses you, then the
ilIusion dissipates.
Once you use this feature, you can't use itagain untU
you finish ashort ar long rest.
ILLUSORY REALITY
By14thlevei,you have learned the secret ofweaving
shadow magic intoyour illusions togivethem asemi-
reality. When you cast an illusion spell of 1stleveior
higher, you can choose one inanimate, nonmagical
object that ispart ofthe illusion and make that object
real. Voucan do this onyour turn as abonus action
while the spell isongoing. The object remains real for
I minute. For example, you can create an illusion ofa
bridge over achasm and then make itreallong enough
foryour allies tocross.
The object can't deal damage or otherwise
directly harm anyone.
SCHOOL OF NECROMANCY
The School ofNecromancy explores the cosmic forces
oflife,death, and undeath. Asyou focus your studies in
this tradition, you learn tomanipulate the energy that
animates allliving things. Asyou progress, you learn to
sap the lifeforce fram acreature as your magic destrays
itsbady, transforming that vital energy into magical
power you can manipulate.
Most people see necramancers as menacing, or even
villainous, due tothe dose association with death.
Notall necramancers are evil,but the forces they
manipulate are considered taboo bymany societies.
NECROMANCY SAVANT
Beginning when you se1ectthis school at 2nd levei,the
goldand time you must spend tocopy anecromancy
spell intoyour spellbook ishalved.
GRIM HARVEST
At2nd levei,you gain the ability toreap lifeenergy from
creatures you killwith your spells. Once per turn when
you killone ar more creatures with aspell of 1stlevei
or higher, yau regain hitpoints equal totwice the spell's
levei,or three times itslevelifthe spell belongs tothe
School ofNecramancy. Voudon't gain this benefit for
killing constructs or undead.
UNDEAD THRALLS
At6th levei,you add the animate dead spell toyour
spellbook ifitisnot there already, When you cast
animate dead, youcan target one additional corpse
or pile ofbones, creating another zombie or ske1eton,
as appropriate,
Whenever you create an undead using anecromancy
spell, ithas additional benefits:
The creature's hitpoint maximum isincreased byan
amount equal toyour wizard leveI.
The creature adds your proficiency bonus toits
weapon damage rolls,
INURED TO UNDEATH
Beginning at 10th levei,you have resistance tonecrotic
damage, and your hit point maximum can't be reduced.
Vouhave spent so much time dealing with undead and
the forces that animate them that you have become
inured tosome oftheir worst effects.
COMMAND UNDEAD
Starting at 14thlevei,you can use magic tobring
undead under your control, even those created byother
wizards. Asan action, you can choose one undead that
you can see within 60 feet ofyou.That creature must
make aCharisma saving throw against your wizard
spell save DC.Ifitsucceeds, you can't use this feature
on itagain. Ifitfails, itbecomes friendly toyouand
obeys your commands until you use this feature again.
Intelligent undead are harder tocontrol inthis way.
Ifthe target has an Intelligence of8or higher, ithas
advantage on the saving throw. Ifitfails the saving
throw and has an Intelligence of12or higher, itcan
repeat the saving throw at the end ofevery hour until it
succeeds and breaks free.
SCHOOL OF TRANSMUTATION
Vouare astudent ofspells that modify energy and matler.
Toyou,the world isnot afixedthing, buteminently
mutable, and youdelight inbeing an agent ofchange.
Vouwield the raw stuffofcreation and learn toalter both
physical forms and mental qualities. Yourmagic gives
you the tools tobecome asmith on reality's forge.
Some transmuters are tinkerers and pranksters,
turning people into toads and transforming copper into
silver forfun and occasional profit. Others pursue their
magical studies with deadly seriousness, seeking the
power ofthe gods tomake and destroy worlds.
TRANSMUTATION SAVANT
Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei,the
goldand time you must spend tocopy atransmutation
spell intoyour spellbook ishalved.
MINaR ALCHEMY
Starting at 2nd leveiwhen you select this school, you
can temporarily alter the physical properties ofone
nonmagical object, changing itfrom one substance into
another. Vouperform aspecial alchemical procedure
on one object composed entire1yofwood, stone (but not
agemstone), iron, copper, or silver, transforming itinto
adifferent one ofthose materiais. For each 10minutesyou spend performing the procedure, you can transform
up to I cubic footofmaterial. After 1hour, or until you
lose your concentration (as ifyouwere concentrating on
aspell), the material reverts toitsoriginal substance.
TRANSMUTER'S STONE
Starting at 6th levei,you can spend 8hours creating a
transmuter's stone that stores transmutation magic. Vou
can benefit from the stone yourself or giveittoanother
creature. Acreature gains abenefit ofyour choice
as long as the stone isinthe creature's possession.
When you create the stone, choose the benefit from the
following options:
Darkvision out toarange of60 feet, as described in
chapter 8
Anincrease tospeed of lOfeet while the creature is
unencumbered
Proficiency inConstitution saving throws
Resistance toacid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder
damage (your choice whenever you choose this
benefit)
Each time you cast atransmutation spell of Ist levei
or higher, you can change the effect ofyour stone ifthe
stone isonyour person.
Ifyou create anew transmuter's stone, the previous
one ceases tofunction.
SHAPECHANGER
At 10th levei,you add the polymorphspell toyour
spellbook, ifitisnot there already. Voucan cast
polymorphwithout expending aspell slot. When you
do so,you can target onlyyourself and transform into a
beast whose challenge rating is 1or lower.
Once you cast polymorphinthis way,you can't doso
again until you finish ashort or long rest, though you
can still cast itnormally using an available spell slot.
MASTER TRANSMUTER
Starting at 14th levei,you can use your action to
consume the reserve oftransmutation magic slored
within your transmuter's stone inasingle burst. When
you do so, choose one ofthe following effects. Your
transmuter's stone isdestroyed and can'l be remade
until you finish along rest.
M'lÍor Transfarmatian. Voucan transmute one
nonmagical object-no larger than a5.fool cube-inlo
another nonmagical object ofsimilar size and mass and
ofequal or lesservalue. Voumust spend 10minutes
handling the object lOlransform it.
Panacea.Vouremove alicurses, diseases, and poisons
affecting acrealure that youtouch with the transmuter's
stone. The creature also regains aliitshitpoints.
Restare Life. Voucast the raise deadspell on a
creature you touch with the transmuter's stone, without
expending aspell si 01or needing tohave the spell in
your spellbook.
Restare Yauth. Voutouch the transmuter's stone to
awilling creature, and that creature's apparent age is
reduced by3dlO years, toaminimum of 13years. This
effect doesn't extend lhe creature's lifespan.
NRTJCLASSES
"9
Vou don't need to be confined to binary notions of
sex and gender. The elf god Corellon Larethian is often
seen as androgynous or hermaphroditic, for example,
and some elves in the multiverse are made in Corellon's
image. Vou could also play a female character who
presents herself as a man, a man who feels trapped in a
female body, or a bearded female dwarf who hates being
mistaken for a male. Likewise, your character's sexual
orientation is for you to decide.CHAPTER 4:PERSONALITY AND BACKGROUND
~HARACTERS ARE DEFINED BYMUCH MORETHAN
their race and c1ass. They're individuais with
their own stories, interests, connections, and
capabilities beyond those that c1ass and race
define. This chapter expounds on the details
that distinguish characters from one another,
including the basics of name and physical description,
the rules of backgrounds and languages, and the finer
points of personality and alignment.
CHARACTER DETAILSHEIGHT AND WEIGHT
NAME
SEXYour character's race description includes sample
names for members of that race. Put some thought into
your name even ifyou're just picking one from a list.Your character's name and physical description might
be the first things that the other players at the table
learn about you. !t's worth thinking about how these
characteristics reflect the character you have in mind.
RANOOM HEICHT ANO WEICHT
Base Height Base Weight
Race Height Modifier Weight Modifier
Human 4'8" +2d10 1101b. x (2d4) Ib.
Dwarf, hill 3'8" +2d4 1lS Ib. x (2d6) Ib.
Dwarf, mountain 4' +2d4 130Ib. x (2d6) Ib.
Elf, high 4'6" +2d10 901b. x (ld4) Ib.
Elf, wood 4'6" +2d10 1001b. x (ld4) Ib.
Elf, drow 4'5" +2d6 751b. x (ld6) Ib.
Halfling 2'7" +2d4 351b. xllb.
Dragonborn 5'6" +2d8 1751b. x (2d6) Ib.
Gnome 2'11" +2d4 351b. xl Ib.
Half-elf 4'9" +2d8 1101b. x (2d4) Ib.
Half-orc 4'10" +2d10 1401b. x (2d6) Ib.
Tiefling 4'9" +2d8 1101b. x (2d4) Ib.Vou can decide your character's height and weight,
using the information provided in your race description
or on the Random Height and Weight table. Think about
what your character's ability scores might say about his
or her height and weight. A weak but agile character
might be thin. A strong and tough character might be
tall or just heavy.
If you want to, you can roll randomly for your
character's height and weight using the Random Height
and Weight table. The dice roll given in the Height
Modifier column determines the character's extra
height (in inches) beyond the base height. That same
number multiplied by the dice roll or quantity given in
the Weight Modifier column determines the character's
extra weight (in pounds) beyond the base weight.
For example, as a human, Tika has a height of 4 feet 8
inches plus 2dlO inches. Her player rolls 2dlO and gets
a total of 12, so Tika stands 5 feet 8 inches tal I. Then
the player uses that same roll of 12 and multiplies it by
2d4 pounds. Her 2d4 roll is 3, so Tika weighs an extra
36 pounds (12 x 3) on top of her base 110 pounds, for a
total of 146 pounds.
Vou choose your character's age and the color of
his or her hair, eyes, and skin. To add a touch of
distinctiveness, you might want to give your character
an unusual or memorable physical characteristic, such
as a scar, a limp, or a tatlOo.OTHER PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS
•••••
•••••
TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: CONTRASTING CHARACTERS
The details in this chapter make a big difference in setting
your character apart from every other character. Consider the
following two human fighters.
Hailing from the Dragonlance setting, Tika Waylan was a
brash teenager who had a rough childhood. The daughter of
a thief, she ran away from home and practiced her father's
trade on the streets of Solace. When she tried to rob the
proprietor of the Inn of the Last Home, he caught her and
took her under his wing, giving her a job as a barmaid. Sut
when the dragonarmies laid waste to the town ofSolace
and destroyed the inn, necessity forced Tika into adventure
alongside the friends she'd known from her childhood. Her
skill as a fighter (a frying pan remains one ofher favorite
weapons) combined with her history on the streets gave her
skills invaluable in her adventuring career.
Artemis Entrer; grew up on the streets of Calimport in the
Forgotten Realms. He used his wits, strength, and agility
to carve out his own territory in one of the city's hundreds
of poor shanty towns. After several years, he attracted the
notice of one ofthe most powerful thieves' guilds in the city,
and he ascended the ranks ofthe guild quickly despite his
youth. Artemis became the favored assassin of one ofthe
city's pashas, who sent him to far-off Icewind Dale to recover
some stolen gems. He's a professional killer, constantly
challenging himselfto improve his skills.
Tika and Artemis are both human and both fighters (with
some experience as rogues), possessing similarly high
Strength and Dexterity scores, but there the similarity ends.Vou can play a male or female character without gaining
any special benefits or hindrances. Think about how
your character does or does not conform to the broader
cu!ture's expectations of sex, gender, and sexual
behavior. For example, a male drow c1eric defies the
traditional gender divisions of drow society, which could
be a reason for your character to leave that society and
come to the surface.
PARr1IPI'RSONAIITY.\ D BACKGROU U
121
•• ••
TIKA AND ARTEMIS: CHARACTER DETAILS
Consider how the names Tika Waylan and Artemis Entreri
set these characters apart from each other and refiect their
personalities. Tika is a young woman determined to prove
that she's not just a kid any more, and her name makes her
sound young and ordinary. Artemis Entreri comes from an
exotic land and carries a more mysterious name.
Tika is nineteen years old at the start of her adventuring
career and has aubum hair, green eyes, fair skin with freckles,
and a mole on her right hip. Artemis is a small man, compact
and ali wiry muscle. He has angular features and high
cheekbones, and he always seems in need of a shave. His
raven.black hair is thick and full, but his eyes are gray and
Iifeless-betraying the emptiness of his life and sou I....•..---------------------- ..
ALIGNMENT
Atypical creature inthe worlds ofDUNGEONS &
DRAGONShas an alignment, which broadly describes
its moral and personal attitudes. Alignment isa
combinalion oftwo factors: one identifies morality
(good, evil,or neutra I),and the olher describes
altitudes toward society and order (Iawful, chaotie,
or neutral). Thus, nine distinct alignments define the
possible combinations.
These brief summaries ofthe nine alignments
describe the typical behavior ofacreature with that
alignment. Individuais might vary significantly from
that typical behavior, and fewpeople are perfectly and
consistently faithful tothe precepts oftheir alignment.
Lawful good (LG)creatures can becounted on todo
the right thing as expected bysociety. Gold dragons,
paladins, and most dwarves are lawful good.
Neutral good (NG)folkdothe best they can tohelp
others according totheir needs. Many celestiais, some
e10udgiants, and most gnomes are neutral good.
Chaotic good (CG)creatures act as their conscience
directs, with little regard forwhat others expect. Copper
dragons, many elves, and unicorns are chaotie good.
Lawful neutra I(LN) individuais act inaccordance
with law,tradition, or personal codes. Many monks and
some wizards are lawful neutra!.
Neutral (N) isthe alignment ofthose who prefer to
steer e1earofmoral questions and don't take sides,
DWARVISH SCRIPT: SAMPLE ALPHABETdoing what seems best at the time. Lizardfolk, most
druids, and many humans are neutra!.
Chaotic neutral (CN)creatures follow their whims,
holding their personal freedom above alielse.
Many barbarians and rogues, and some bards, are
chaotie neutra!.
Lawful evil (LE) creatures methodically take what they
want, within the limits ofacode oftradition, loyalty,or
order. Devils,bluedragons, and hobgoblins are Jawfulevil.
Neutral evil (NE) isthe alignment ofthose who do
whatever they can get away with, without compassion or
qualms. Many drow, some e10udgiants, and yugoloths
are neutra Ievi!.
Chaotic evil (CE)creatures act with arbitrary
violence, spurred bytheir greed, hatred, or bloodlust.
Demons, red dragons, and orcs are chaotie evil.
ALIGNMENT IN THE MULTIVERSE
For many thinking creatures, alignment isa moral
choice. Humans, dwarves, e1ves,and other humanoid
races can choose whether to followthe paths ofgood or
evil, law or chaos. According to myth, the good-aligned
gods who created these races gave them free will to
choose their moral paths, knowing that good without
free will isslavery.
The evildeities who created other races, though, made
those races toserve them. Those races have strong
inborn tendencies that match the nature oftheir gods.
Most orcs share the violent, savage nature ofthe orc
god, Gruumsh. and are thus inelined toward evil. Even if
an orc chooses a good alignment, itstruggles against its
innate tendencies for its entire life.(Even half-orcs feel
the lingering pull ofthe orc god's influence.)
Alignment isan essential pari ofthe nature of
celestiaIs and fiends. Adevil does not choose tobe
lawful evil, and itdoesn't tend toward lawful evil, but
rather itislawful evilin its essence. Ifitsomehow
ceased tobe lawful evil, itwould cease tobe adevil.
Most creatures that lack the capacity for rational
thought donol have alignments-they are unaligned.
Such acreature is incapable ofmaking amoral or
ethical choice and acts according toits bestial nature.
Sharks are savage predators, forexample, but they are
not evil;they have noalignment.
122I.
ABCDEFGHIJKLM
<T]"J~Ir11+1:J~YP
NOpQRSTUVWXyZ
Vt)rI~ ~r~'11~ ~n~
PART IIPERSONALlTY AND BACKGROUND
•••
LANGUAGES
Your race indicates the languages your character can
speak by default, and your background might give you
access to one or more additionallanguages Dfyour
choice. Note these languages on your character sheet.
Choose your languages from the Standard Languages
table, or choose one that is common in your campaign.
With your DM's permission, you can instead choose a
language from the Exotic Languages table or a secret
language, such as thieves' cant or the tongue Dfdruids.
Some Dfthese languages are actually families
Dflanguages with many dialects. For example, the
Primordiallanguage includes the Auran, Aquan, Ignan,
and Terran dialects, one for each Dfthe four elemental
planes. Creatures that speak different dialects Dfthe
same language can communicate with one another.
STANDARD LANCUACES
Language TypiealSpeakers Seript
Common Humans Common
Dwarvish Dwarves Dwarvish
Elvish Elves Elvish
Giant Ogres, giants Dwarvish
Gnomish Gnomes Dwarvish
Goblin Goblinoids Dwarvish
Halfling Halflings Common
Ore Ores Dwarvish
EXOTIC LANCUAGES
Language TypicalSpeakers Seript
Abyssal Demons Infernal
Celestial Celestiais Celestial
Draconic Dragons, Draconic
dragonborn
Deep Speech Mind flayers,
beholders
Infernal Devils Infernal
Primordial Elementals Dwarvish
Sylvan Feycreatures Elvish
Undercommon Underdark traders Elvish
ELVISH SCRIPT: SAM PLE ALPHABET""TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: ALIGNMENT
TikaWaylanis neutral good, fundamentally good-hearted
and striving to help others where she canoArtemis is lawful
evil, unconcerned with the value of sentient lifebut at least
professional in his approach to murder.
Asan evilcharacter, Artemis is not an ideal adventurer. He
began his career as avillain,and onlycooperates with heroes
when he must-and when it's inhis own best interests. In
most games, eviladventurers cause problems ingroups
alongside others who don't share their interests and objectives.
Generally,evilalignments are forvillainsand monsters.
~ ~
PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Fleshing out your character's personality-the array Df
traits, mannerisms, habits, beliefs, and flaws that give
a person a unique identity-will help you bring him
or her to life as you play the game. Four categories Df
characteristics are presented here: personality traits,
ideais, bonds, and flaws. Beyond those categories,
think about your character's favorite words or phrases,
tics and habitual gestures, vices and pet peeves, and
whatever else you can imagine.
Each background presented later in this chapter
includes suggested characteristics that you can use
to spark your imagination. You're not bound to those
options, but they're a good starting point.
PERSONALITY TRAITS
Give your character two personality traits. Personality
traits are small, simple ways to help you set your
character apart from every other character. Your
personality traits should tell you something interesting
and fun about your character. They should be self.
descriptions that are specific about what makes your
character stand out. "I'm smart" is not a good trait,
because it describes a lot Dfcharacters. "!'ve read every
book in Candlekeep" tells you something specific about
your character's interests and disposition.
Personality traits might describe the things your
character likes, his or her past accomplishments, things
your character dislikes or fears, your character's sei f-
attitude or mannerisms, or the influence Dfhis or her
ability scores.
ABCDEFGHIJKLM
()OaS (J(r6!J1cfrifJ (lJ w
NopQRSTUVWxyz
-
(j{if:(1c)(9d()ff)IC fjJ(9
PART 1 JPERSONALllY ANO BACKGROlJ I.)
123
,.A h
TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: PERSONAL CHARACTERISTICS
Tika and Artemis have distinct personality traits. Tika Waylan
dislikes boastfulness and has a fear of heights resulting
from a bad fali during her career as a thief. Artemis Entreri
is always prepared for the worst and moves with a quick,
precise confidence.
Consider their ideais. Tika Waylan is innocent, almost
childlike, believing in the value oflife and the importance of
appreciating everyone. Neutral good in alignment, she c1eaves
to ideais of life and respec!. Artemis Entreri never allows
his emotions to master him, and he constantly challenges
himself to improve his skills. His lawful evil alignment gives
him ideais of impartiality and a lust for power.
Tika Waylan's bond is to the Inn ofthe Last Home. The
inn's proprietor gave her a new chance at life, and her
friendship with her adventuring companions was forged
during her time working there. Its destruction by the
marauding dragonarmies gives Tika a very personal reason to
hate them with a fiery passion. Her bond might be phrased
as "I will do whatever it takes to punish the dragonarmies for
the destruction ofthe Inn ofthe Last Home."
Artemis Entreri's bond is a strange, almost paradoxical
relationship with Drizzt Do'Urden, his equal in swordplay
and grim determination. In his first battle with Drizzt,
Artemis recognized something of himself in his opponent,
some indication that if his life had gone differently, he
might have led a life more like the heroic drow's. From that
moment, Artemis is more than acriminal assassin-he isan
antihero, driven by his rivalry with Drizz!. His bond might be
phrased as "I will not rest untill have proved myselfbetter
than Drizzt Do'Urden."
Each of these characters also has an important flaw.
Tika Waylan is naive and emotionally vulnerable, younger
than her companions and annoyed that they still think
of her as the kid they knew years ago. She might even be
tempted to act against her principies ifshe's convinced that
a particular achievement would demonstrate her maturity.
Artemis Entreri is completely walled offfrom any personal
relationship and just wants to be left alone.
~
Auseful place tostart thinking about personality
traits isto look at your highest and lowest ability scores
and define one trait related to each. Either one could be
positive or negative:you might work hard toovercome a
lowscore, forexample, or be cocky about your high score.
DRACONIC SCRIPT: SAMPLE ALPHABETIDEALS
Describe one ideal that drives your character. Your ideais
are the things that you believe in most strongly, the
fundamental moral and ethical principies that compel you
to act as you do. Ideais encompass everything from your
lifegoals toyour core belief system.
Ideais might answer any ofthese questions: What are
the principies that you will neverbetray? What would
prompt you to make sacrifices? What drives you to act
and guides your goals and ambitions? What isthe single
most important thing you strive for?
Voucan choose any ideais you like, but your
character's alignment isa good place tostart defining
them. Each background in this chapter includes six
suggested ideais. Five ofthem are linked to aspects of
alignment: law,chaos, good, evit, and neutrality. The last
one has more to do with the particular background than
with moral or ethical perspectives.
BONDS
Create one bond foryour character. Bonds represent a
character's connections topeople, places, and events in
the world. They tieyou tothings from your background.
They might inspire you to heights ofheroism, or lead
you to act against your own best interests ifthey are
threatened. They can work very much like ideaIs,
driving a character's motivations and goals.
Bonds might answer any ofthese questions: Whom do
you care most about? Towhat place doyou feeIa special
connection? What isyour most treasured possession?
Your bonds might be tied toyour c1ass,your
background, your race, or some other aspect ofyour
character's history or personality. Voumight also gain
new bonds over the course ofyour adventures.
FLAWS
Finally, choose a flawforyour character. Your
character's flawrepresents some vice, compulsion, fear,
or weakness-in particular, anything that someone
e1secould exploit to bring you to ruin ar cause you to
act against your best interests. More significant than
negative personality traits, a flaw might answer any
ofthese questions: What enrages you? What's the one
person, concept, or event that you are terrified of? What
are your vices?
124ABCDEFGHIJKLM
'-t~•
~'ff1,-Vlf T1r 7"}
NOpQRSTUVWXYZ
0--t W::).V'"r,-"'J1ff~f1fJ
PART IIPERSONALITY ANO BACKCROUND
INSPIRATION
Inspiration is a rule the Dungeon Master can use to
reward you for playing your character in a way that's
true to his or her personality traits, ideal, bond, and flaw.
By using inspiration, you can draw on your personality
trait of compassion for the downtrodden to give you
an edge in negotiating with the Beggar Prince. Or
inspiration can let you calI on your bond to the defense
of your home village to push past the effect of a spelI
that has been laid on you.
GAINING INSPIRATION
Your DM can choose to give you inspiration for a variety
of reasons. TypicalIy, DMs award it when you play
out your personality traits, give in to the drawbacks
presented by a flaw or bond, and otherwise portray your
character in a compelIing way. Your DM wilI telI you
how you can earn inspiration in the game.
Vou either have inspiration or you don't-you can't
stockpile multi pie "inspirations" for later use.
USING INSPIRATION
lf you have inspiration, you can expend it when you make
an attack rolI, saving throw, or ability check. Spending
your inspiration gives you advantage on that rol!.
AdditionalIy, if you have inspiration, you can reward
another player for good roleplaying, e1ever thinking,
or simply doing something exciting in the game.
When another player characler does somelhing that
realIy contributes to the story in a fun and interesting
way, you can give up your inspiration to give lhat
characler inspiration.
BACKGROUNDS
Every story has a beginning. Your character's
background reveals where you carne from, how you
beca me an adventurer, and your place in the world.
Your tighter might have been a courageous knight or a
grizzled soldier. Your wizard could have been a sage or
an artisan. Your rogue might have gotten by as a guild
thief or commanded audiences as a jester.
Choosing a background provides you with important
story cues about your character's identity. The most
important question to ask about your background is
what changed? Why did you stop doing whatever your
background describes and start adventuring? Where
did you get the money to purchase your starting gear, or,
if you come from a wealthy background, why don't you
havemore money? How did you learn the skills of your
e1ass? What sets you apart from ordinary people who
share your background?
4 ,
TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: BACKCROUNOS
Tika Waylan and Artemis Entreri bolh lived lheir earliest years
as street urchins. Tika's later career as a barmaid didn't really
change her, so she might choose the urchin background,
gaining proficiency in the Sleight of Hand and Stealth skills.
and learning the tools ofthe thieving trade. Artemis is more
defined by his criminal background, giving him skills in
Deception and Steallh, as well as proficiency wilh lhe tools of
lhievery and poison .
.••• r---------------------JI"-The sample backgrounds in this chapter provide
both concrete benetits (features, proticiencies, and
languages) and roleplaying suggestions.
PROFICIENCIES
Each background gives a character proticiency in two
skills. SkilIs are described in chapter 7.
In addition, most backgrounds give a character
proticiency with one or more tools. Tools and tool
proticiencies are detailed in chapter 5.
If a character would gain the same proticiency from
two different sources, he or she can choose a different
proticiency of the same kind (skilI or tool) instead.
LANGUAGES
Some backgrounds also alIow characters to learn
additional languages beyond those given by race.
See "Languages" earlier in this chapter.
EQUIPMENT
Each background provides a package of starting
equipmcnt. lf you use the optional rule from chapter 5
to spend coin on gear, you do not receive the starting
equipment from your background.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
A background contains suggested personal
characleristics based on your background. Vou can
pick characteristics, rolI dice to determine
them randomly, or use the suggestions
as inspiration for characteristics of
your own creation.
CUSTOMIZING A
BACKGROUND
Vou might want to tweak
some of the features of a
background so it better
tits your character
or the campaign
setting. To customize
a background, you can
replace one feature
with any other one,
choose any two
skills, and choose
a total of two to01
proticiencies or
languages from the
sample backgrounds.
Vou can either use
the equipment
package from your
background or spend
coin on gear as
described in chapter
5. (lf you spend
coin, you can't also
take the equipment
package suggestcd
for your c1ass.)
FinalIy, choose
two personality
traits, one ideal. one bond, and one flaw. lfyou can't find
a feature that matches your desired background, work
with your DM to create one.
ACOLYTE
Vou have spent your life in the service of a temple
to a specific god or pantheon of gods, Vou act as an
intermediary between the realm of the holy and the
mortal world, performing sacred rites and offering
sacrifices in order to conduct worshipers into the
presence of the divine. Vou are not necessarily a
cleric-performing sacred rites is not the same thing aS
channeling divine power.
Choose a god, a pantheon of gods, or some other
quasi-divine being from among those listed in appendix
B or those specified by your DM, and work with your
DM to detail the nature of your religious service.
Were you a lesser functionary in a temple, raised from
childhood to assist the priests in the sacred rites? Or
were you a high priest who suddenly experienced a call
to serve your god in a different way? Perhaps you were
the leader of a small cult outside of any established
tem pIe structure, or even an occult group that served a
fiendish master that you now deny.
Skill Proficiencies: Insight, Religion
Languages: Two of your choice
Equiprnent: A holy symbol (a gift to you when you
entered the priesthood), a prayer book or prayer
wheel, 5 sticks of incense, vestments, a set of common
clothes, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
FEATURE: SHELTER OF THE FAITHFUL
As an acolyte, you command the respect of those who
share your faith, and you can perform the religious
ceremonies of your deity. You and your adventuring
companions can expect to receive free healing and
care at a temple, shrine, or other established presence
of your faith, though you must provide any material
components needed for spells. Those who share
your religion will support you (but only you) at a
modest lifestyle.
Vou might also have ties to a specific tem pIe dedicated
to your chosen deity or pantheon, and you have a
residence there, This could be the temple where you
used to serve, if you remain on good terms with it, or a
temple where you have found a new home, While near
your temple. you can call upon the priests for assistance.
provided the assistance you ask for is not hazardous and
you remain in good standing with your temple.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Acolytes are shaped by their experience in temples
or other religious communities. Their study of the
history and tenets of their faith and their relationships
to temples, shrines, or hierarchies affect their
mannerisms and ideaIs. Their flaws might be some
hidden hypocrisy or heretical idea, or an ideal or bond
taken to an extreme.d8 Personality Trail
1 I idolize a parlicular hero of my faith, and conslanlly
refer lo Ihal person's deeds and example,
2 I can find common ground belween lhe fiercesl
enemies, empalhizing wilh Ih em and always working
loward peace.
3 I see omens in every evenl and aclion. lhe gods Iry lo
speak lo uso we jusl need lo lislen
4 NOlhing can shake my oplimislic altilude.
S I quole (or misquole) sacred lexls and proverbs in
almost every situation.
6 I am loleranl (or inloleranl) of olher failhs and respecl
(or condemn) lhe worship of olher gods.
7 I've enjoyed fine food, drink, and high society among
my temple's elite. Rough living grates on me.
8 I've spenl so long in the tem pie that I have liltle
practical experience dealing with people in the outside
world.
d6 Ideal
1 Tradilion. lhe aneient traditions of worship and
sacrifice must be preserved and upheld. (Lawful)
2 Charily. I always try to help those in need, no matter
what the personal cosI. (Good)
Change. We must help bring aboullhe changes lhe
gods are constantly working in the world. ((haotic)
4 Power. I hope to one day rise to the top of my failh's
religious hierarchy. (Lawful)
S Failh. I trust that my deity will guide my aclions. I have
faith that if I work hard, things will go well. (Lawful)
6 Aspiralion. I seek lo prove myself worthy of my god's
favor by matching my actions againsl his or her
teachings. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 I would die lo recover an ancient relic of my faith that
was lost long ago.
2 I will someday get revenge on the corrupt temple
hierarchy who branded me a heretic.
3 I owe my life to the priest who took me in when my
parenls died.
4 Everylhing I do is for the common people.
S I will do anylhing lo prolect the tem pie where I served.
6 I seek to preserve a sacred text that my enemies
consider heretical and seek to destroy.
d6 Flaw
1 I judge olhers harshly, and myself even more severely.
2 I pulloo much Irusl in Ihose who wield power wilhin
my lemple's hierarchy.
3 My piely somelimes leads me lo blindly Irusllhose
that profess failh in my god.
4 Iam inflexible in my Ihinking.
5I am suspicious af strangers and expect the worst cf
them.
6 Once I pick a goal, I become obsessed wilh it to the
detriment of everylhing else in my life.
P.. \l{f 11 PERSONAIITY DB\( KGROU. O
127
128CHARLATAN
Vou have always had a way with people. Vou know
what makes them tick. you can tease out their hearts'
desires after a few minutes of conversation, and with a
few leading questions you can read them like they were
children's books. !t's a useful talent, and one that you're
perfectly willing to use for your advantage.
Vou know what people want and you deliver. or rather,
you promise to deliver. Common sense should steer
people away from things that sound toa good to be true,
but common sense seems to be in short supply when
you're around. The bottle of pink-colored liquid will
surely cure that unseemly rash, this ointment-nothing
more than a bit of fat with a sprinkle of silver dust-can
restore youth and vigor, and there's a bridge in the city
thatjust happens to be for sale. These marvels sound
implausible, but you make them sound like the real dea!.
SkillProficiencies: Deception, Sleight of Hand
Too! Proficiencies: Disguise kit, forgery kit
Equiprnent: Aset of fine c1othes, a disguise kit, tools
of the con of your choice (ten stoppered bottles filled
with colored liquid, a set of weighted dice, a deck of
marked cards, or a signet ring of an imaginary duke).
and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
FAVORITE SCHEMES
Every charlatan has an angle he or she uses in
preference to other schemes. Choose a favorite scam or
roll on the table below.
d6 Scam
1 Icheat at games ofchance.
2 Ishave coins or forge documents.
3 Iinsinuate myselfinto people's livesto preyon their
weakness and secure their fortunes.
4 Iput on new identities likeclothes.
S Irun sleight-of.hand cons on street corners.
6 Iconvince people that worthless junk isworth their
hard.earned money.
FEATURE: FALSE IDENTITY
Vou have created a second identity that includes
documentation, established acquaintallces, and
disguises that allow you to assume that persona.
Additionally, you can forge documents including official
papers and personal letters, as long as you have seen an
example of the kind of document or the handwriting you
are trying to copy.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Charlatans are colorful characters who conceal their
true selves behind the masks they construcl. They
reflect what people want to see, what they want to
believe, and how they scc the world. But their true
sclves are sometimes plagued by an uneasy conscience,
an old enemy, or deep-seated trust issues.
PART 1IPERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUNOd8 Personality Trait
1 Ifaliinand out ofloveeasily, and am always pursuing
someone.
2 Ihave ajoke forevery occasion, especially occasions
where humor isinappropriate.
3 Flattery ismypreferred trick for getting what Iwant,
4 I'm a born gambler who can't resist taking a riskfor a
potential payoff.
S Ilieabout almost everything. even when there's no
good reason to.
6 Sarcasm and insults are myweapons ofchoice.
7 Ikeep multiple holysymbols on me and invoke
whatever deity might come inuseful at anygiven
momento
8 Ipocket anything Isee that might have some value.
d6 Ideal
1 Independence. Iam afree spirit-no one tells mewhat
to do. ((haotic)
2 Fairness. Inever target people who can't afford to lose
afewcoins. (Lawful)
3 Charity. Idistribute the money Iacquire to the people
who reallyneed it. (Good)
4 Creativity. Inever run the same con twice. ((haotic)
S Friendship. Material goods come and go. Bonds of
friendship last forever, (Good)
6 Aspiration. I'm determined to make something
of myself. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 Ifleeced the wrong person and must work to ensure
that this individual never crosses paths with me or
those Icare about.
2 Iowe everything to mymentor-a horrible person
who's probably rotting injailsomewhere.
3 Somewhere out there, Ihave achild who doesn't
know me. I'm making the world better for him or her.
4 Icome frem anoble family, and one day 1'11reelaim my
lands and title from those who stole them from me.
S Apowerful person killedsomeone Ilove. Some day
soon, 1'11 have myrevenge.
6 Iswindled and ruined aperson who didn't deserve il. I
seek to atone for mymisdeeds but might never be able
to forgive myself.
d6 Flaw
1 Ican't resist apretty face.
2 I'm always indebt. Ispend myill.gotten gains on
decadent luxuries faster than Ibring them in..
3 I'm convinced that noone could ever fool me the way
Ifool others.
4 I'mtoo greedy for myown good. Ican'! resist taking a
risk ifthere's money involved.
S Ican'! resist swindling people who are more powerful
than me.
6 Ihate to admit itand willhate myself for it,but 1'11 run
and preserve myown hide ifthe going gets tough.
CRIMINAL
Vou are an experienced criminal wilh a hislory of
breaking lhe law. Vou have spenl a 101of lime among
olher criminais and still have conlacls wilhin lhe
criminal underworld. You're far closer lhan mosl people
lo lhe world of murder, lhefl, and violence lhal pervades
lhe underbelly of civilizalion, and you have survived up lo
lhis poinl by f10uling lhe rules and regulalions of sociely.
SkillProficiencies: Deceplion, Slealth
Tool Proficiencies: One lype of gaming seI,
lhieves' lools
Equiprnent: A crowbar, a seI of dark common clolhes
including a hood, and a bell pouch conlaining 15gp
CRIMINAL SPECIALTY
There are many kinds of criminais, and wilhin a lhieves'
guild or similar criminal organizalion, individual
members have particular speciallies. Even criminais
who operale oulside of such organizalions have slrong
preferences for cerlain kinds of crimes over olhers.
Choose lhe role you played in your criminallife, or roll
on lhe lable below.
d8 Specialty d8 Specialty
1Blaekmailer 5Highway robber
2Burglar 6 Hired killer
3Enforeer 7Piekpocket
4Fenee 8Smuggler
FEATURE: CRIMINAL CONTACT
Vou have a reliable and lruslworlhy conlacl who acls as
your liaison lo a network of olher criminais. Vou know
how lo gel messages lo and from your conlacl, even
over greal dislances; specifically, you know lhe local
messengers, corrupl caravan maslers, and seedy sailors
who can deliver messages for you.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Criminais mighl seem like villains on lhe surface,
and many of lhem are villainous lOlhe core. Sut some
have an abundance of endearing, ifnol redeeming,
characlerislics. There mighl be honor among lhieves, bul
criminais rarely show any respecl for law or aUlhorily.
d8 Personality Trait
1 Ialways have aplan for whal to do when lhings go
wrong.
2 Iam always ealm, no maller what the situation. Inever
raise my voice ar let my emotions control me.
3 The firsl thing Ido ina new plaee isnote the loeations
ofeverything valuable-or where sueh things eould be
hidden.
4 Iwould rather make a new friend than a new enemy.
5 Iam ineredibly slow to trust. Those who seem lhe
fairest often have the most to hide.
6 Idon't payattention to the risks ina siluation. Never
tell me the odds.
7 The best wayto get me to do something isto tell me I
ean't do it.
8 Iblow up at the slightest insult.d6 Ideal
1 Honor. Idon't steal from others inthe trade. (Lawful)
2 Freedom. (hains are meant to be broken, as are those
who would forge them. ((haotie)
3 Charity. Isteal from the wealthy so that Iean help
people inneed. (Good)
4 Greed. Iwilldo whatever ittakes to become
wealthy. (Evil)
5 People. I'm loyalto myfriends, not to any ideais, and
everyone else ean lake atrip down the Styxfor ali I
eare. (Neutral)
6 Redemption. There's a spark ofgood ineveryone.
(Good)
d6 Bond
1 I'm trying to payo f!'an old debt Iowe to agenerous
benefaetor.
2 Myill.gotten gains go to support myfamily.
3 Something important was laken from me, and Iaim to
sleal it baek.
4 Iwillbeeome the greatest thief that ever lived.
5 I'm guilty ofalerrible crime. Ihope Iean redeem
myself for it.
6 Someone Iloved died beeause of Imistake Imade.
Thal willnever happen again.
d6 Flaw
1 When Isee something valuable, Ican't think about
anything but how to steal it.
2 When faced with a choice between money and my
friends, I usually choose the money.
3 Ifthere's a plan, 1'11forget it. If Idon't forget it, 1'11
ignore il.
4 I have a "tell" that reveals when I'm Iying.
S Itum tail and run when things look bad.
6 An innocent person is in prison for a crime that I
committed. I'm okay with that.
VARIANT CRIMINAL: Spy
Although your capabilities are not much different
from those of a burglar or smuggler, you learned
and practiced them in a very different context: as an
espionage agenl. Voumight have been an officially
sanctioned agent of the crown, or perhaps you sold the
secrets you uncovered to the highest bidder.ENTERTAINER
Vouthrive in front of an audience. Vouknow how to
entrance them, entertain them, and even inspire them.
Your poetics can stir the hearts of those who hear you,
awakening grief or joy, laughter or anger. Your music
raises their spirits or captures their sorrow. Your dance
steps captivate, your humor cuts to the quick. Whatever
techniques you use, your art is your life.
Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics, Performance
Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit, one type of
musical instrument
Equiprnent: Amusical instrument (one ofyour choice),
the favor ofan admirer (love lelter, lock of hair, or
trinket), a costume, and a belt pouch containing 15gp
ENTERTAINER ROUTINES
Agood entertainer is versatile, spicing up every
performance with a variety of different routines. Choose
one to three routines or roll on the table below to define
your expertise as an entertainer.
dl0Enterlainer Routine dl0Enterlainer Routine
1Actor 6Instrumentalist
2Dancer 7Poet
3Fire-eater 8Singer
4}ester 9Storyteller
SJuggler 10Tumbler
FEATURE: By POPULAR DEMAND
Voucan always find a place to perform, usually in an
inn or tavern but possibly with a circus, at a theater, or
even in a noble's court. At such a place, you receive free
lodging and food of a modest or comfortable standard
(depending on the quality of the establishment), as
long as you perform each night. In addition, your
performance makes you something of a local figure.
When strangers recognize you in a town where you have
performed, they typically take a liking to you.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Successful entertainers have to be able to capture
and hold an audience's attention, so they tend to
have flamboyant or forceful personalities. They're
inclined toward the romantic and often cling to
high-minded ideaIs about the practice of art and the
appreciation of beauty.
d8 Personality Trait
1 Iknow a story relevant to almost every situation.
2 Whenever Icome to a new place, Icollect local rumors
and spread gossip.
3 I'm a hopeless romantic, always searching for that
"special someone."
4 Nobody stays angry at me or around me for long, since
Ican defuse any amount of tension.
S I love a good insult, even one directed at me.
6 Iget bitter if I'm not the center of attention.
7 1'11settle for nothing less than perfection.
8 Ichange my mood or my mind as quickly as Ichange
key in a song.
d6 Ideal
1 Beauly. When I perform, I make lhe world belter lhan
il was. (Good)
2 Tradilion. lhe slories, legends, and songs of the past
must never be forgolten, for they teach us who we
are. (Lawful)
3 Creativily. lhe world is in need of new ideas and bold
action. (Chaotic)
4 Greed. I'm only in it for the money and fame. (Evil)
5 People. I like seeing the smiles on people's faces when
I perform. lha!'s ali that matters. (Neutral)
6 Honesly. Art should reflect the soul; it should come
from within and reveal who we really are. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 My instrument is my most treasured possession, and it
reminds me of someone I love.
2 Someone slole my precious instrumenl, and someday
1'11 get il back.
3 Iwanl to be famous, whatever it takes.
4 I idolize a hero of the old tales and measure my deeds
against lhal person's.
5 Iwill do anything to prove myself superior to my hated
rival.
6 Iwould do anything for the other members of my
old troupe.
d6 Flaw
1 1'11 do anything lo win fame and renown.
2 I'm a sucker for a pretty face.
3 A scandal prevents me from ever going home again.
lhat kind of trouble seems to follow me around.
4 Ionce satirized a noble who still wants my head. It was
a mistake lhat Iwilllikely repeal.
5 Ihave trouble keeping my true feelings hidden. My
sharp tongue lands me in trouble.
6 Despile my best efforts, Iam unreliable to my friends.
VARIANT ENTERTAINER: GLADIATOR
Agladiator is as much an entertainer as any minstrel
or circus performer, trained to make the arts ofcombat
into a spectacle the crawd can enjoy. This kind of
flashy combat is your entertainer routine, though you
might also have some skills as a tumbler or actor.
Using your By Popular Demand feature, you can find a
place to perform in any place that features combat for
entertainment-perhaps a gladiatorial arena or secret
pit fighting club. Voucan replace the musical instrument
in your equipment package with an inexpensive but
unusual weapon, such as a trident or neto
FOLK HERO
Voucome from a humble social rank, but you are
destined for so much more. Already the people of
your home village regard you as their champion, and
your destiny calls you to stand against the tyrants and
monsters that threaten the common folk everywhere.Ski1lProficiencies: Animal Handling, Survival
Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools,
vehicles (land)
Equipment: Aset of artisan's tools (one ofyour choice),
a shovel, an iran pot, a set of common clothes, and a
belt pouch containing 10gp
DEFINING EVENT
Voupreviously pursued a simple prafession among
the peasantry, perhaps as a farmer, miner, servant,
shepherd, woodcutter, argravedigger. But something
happened that set you on a different path and marked
you for greater things. Choose or randomly determine a
defining event that marked you as a heraof the people.
dl0 Defining Evenl
1 Istood up to a tyrant's agents.
2 Isaved people during a natural disaster.
3 Istood alone against a terrible monster.
4 Istole from a corrupt merchant to help the poor.
5 Iled a militia to fight off an invading army.
6 Ibroke into a tyran!'s castle and stole weapons to arm
the people.
7 Itrained the peasantry to use farm implements as
weapons against a tyrant's soldiers.
8 A lord rescinded an unpopular decree after I led a
symbolic act of protect against il.
9 A celestial, fey, or similar creature gave me a blessing
or revealed my secret origino
10 Recruited into a lord's army, I rose to leadership and
was commended for my heroismo
FEATURE: RUSTIC HOSPITALITY
Since you come from the ranks ofthe common folk,
you fitin among them with ease. Voucan find a place
to hide, rest, or recuperate among other commoners,
unless you have shown yourself to be a danger to
them. They will shield you from the law or anyone
else searching for you, though they will not risk
their lives for YOU.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Afolk hero is one of the common people, for better
or for worse. Most folk heraes look on their humble
origins as a virtue, not a shortcoming, and their home
communities remain very important to them.
d8 Personalily Trail
1 Ijudge people by lheir aclions, nol lheir words.
2 Ifsomeone is in trouble, I'm always ready to lend help.
3 When Iset my mind to something, Ifollow through no
malter what gets in my way.
4 I have a strong sense of fair play and always try to find
the most equilable solution to arguments.
5 I'm confidenl in my own abilities and do what Ican to
instill confidence in others.
6 lhinking is for other people. I prefer action.
7 Imisuse long words in an attempt to sound smarter.
8 Iget bored easily. When am Igoing to get on wilh my
desliny?
PART I I PERSONALlTY AND BACKGROUND
'32d6 Ideal
1 Respect. People deserve to be treated with dignity and
respect. (Good)
2 Faimess. No one should get preferentialtreatment
before the law, and no one is above the law. (Lawful)
3 Freedom. lyrants must not be allowed to oppress the
people. (Chaotic)
4 Might. If I beco me strong, I can take what Iwant-
whatl deserve. (Evil)
5 Sincerity. lhere's no good in pretending to be
something I'm not. (Neutral)
6 Destiny. Nothing and no one can steer me away from
my higher calling. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 I have a family, butl have no idea where they are. One
day, I hope to see them again.
2 I worked the land, I love the land, and Iwill protect the
land.
3 A proud noble once gave me a horrible beating, and I
will take my revenge on any bully I encounter.
4 My tools are symbols of my pastlife, and I carry them
50that Iwill never forget my roots.
5 I protectthose who cannot protectthemselves.
6 Iwish my childhood sweetheart had come with me to
pursue my destiny.d6 Flaw
1 lhe tyrant who rules my land will stop at nothing to
see me killed.
2 I'm convinced ofthe significance ofmy destiny, and
blind to my shortcomings and the risk oHailure.
3 lhe people who knew me when Iwas young know my
shameful secret, 50Ican never go home again.
4 I have a weakness for the vices of the city, especially
hard drink.
5 Secretly, I believe thatthings would be beller if Iwere a
tyrantlording over the land.
6 I have trouble trusting in my allies.
GUILD ARTISAN
Vouare a member of an artisan's guild, skilled in
a particular field and c10selyassociated with other
artisans. Vouare a well-established part of the
mercantile world, freed by talent and wealth from the
constraints of a feudal social order. Voulearned your
skills as an apprentice to a master artisan, under the
sponsorship ofyour guild, until you became a master in
your own right.
SkillProficiencies: lnsight, Persuasion
Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools
Languages: One ofyour choice
Equiprnent: Aset ofartisan's tools (one ofyour choice),
a letter ofintroduction from your guild, a set of
traveler's c1othes, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
GUILD BUSINESS
Guilds are generally found in cities large enough to
support several artisans practicing the same trade.
However, your guild might instead be a loose network
of artisans who each work in a different village within
a larger realm. Work with your DM to determine the
nature ofyour guild. Voucan select your guild business
from the Guild Business table or roll randomly.
d20 Guild Business
1 Alchemists and apothecaries
2 Armorers, locksmiths, and finesmiths
3 Brewers, distillers, and vintners
4 Calligraphers, scribes, and scriveners
5 Carpenters, roofers, and plasterers
6 Cartographers, surveyors, and chart-makers
7 Cobblers and shoemakers
8 Cooks and bakers
9 Glassblowers and glaziers
10 Jewelers and gemcutters
11 Leatherworkers, skinners, and tanners
12 Masons and stonecullers
13 Painters, Iimners, and sign.makers
14 Potters and tile-makers
15 Shipwrights and sailmakers
16 Smiths and metal-forgers
17 Tinkers, pewterers, and casters
18 Wagon-makers and wheelwrights
19 Weavers and dyers
20 Woodcarvers, coopers, and bowyers
Asamember ofyour guild, you know the skills needed
tocreale finished items from raw materiaIs (reflected in
your proficiency with acertain kind ofartisan's tools),
as well as the principies oftrade and good business
practices. The question now iswhether you abandon
your trade foradventure, or take on the extra effort to
weave adventuring and trade together.
FEATURE: GUILD MEMBERSHIP
Asan established and respected member ofaguild, you
can relyon certain benefits that membership provides.
Yourfellowguild members will provide youwith
lodging and food ifnecessary, and payforyour funeral
ifneeded. Insome cities and towns, aguildhall offers a
central place tomeet other members ofyour profession,
which can be agood place tomeet potential patrons,
allies, or hirelings.
Guilds often wield tremendous political power. If
you are accused ofacrime, your guild will support you
ifagood case can be made foryour innocence or the
crime isjustifiable. Voucan also gain access topowerful
political figures through the guild, ifyou are amember
ingood standing. Such connections might require the
donation ofmoney or magic items tothe guild's coffers.
Voumust paydues of5gpper month tothe guild. If
you miss payments, you must make up back dues to
remain inthe guild's good graces.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Guild artisans are among the most ordinary people in
the world-until they set down their tools and take up
an adventuring career. They understand the value of
hard work and the importance ofcommunity, but they're
vulnerable tosins ofgreed and covetousness.
d8 Personality Trait
1 Ibelieve that anything worth doing is worth doing
righl. Ican't help it-I'm a perfectionisl.
2 I'm a snob who looks down on those who can't
appreciate hne art.
3 Ialways want to know how things work and what
makes people tick.
4 I'm full ofwitty aphorisms and have a proverb for
every occasion.
S I'm rude to people who lack my commitment to hard
work and fair play.
6 Ilike to talk at length about my profession.
7 Idon't part with my money easily and will haggle
tirelessly to get the best deal possible.
8 I'm well known for my work, and Iwant to make sure
everyone appreclates lI. I'm always taken aback when
people haven't heard of me.d6 Ideal
1 Community. Itis the duty of ali civilized people to
strengthen the bonds of community and the security
of civillzation. (Lawful)
2 Generosity. Mytalents were given to me so that Icould
use them to beneht the world. (Good)
3 Freedom. Everyone should be free to pursue his or her
own livelihood. (Chaotic)
4 Greed. I'm only in it for the money. (Evil)
S People. I'm committed to the people Icare about, not
to ideais. (Neutral)
6 Aspiration. Iwork hard to be the best there is at
my craft.
d6 Bond
1 The workshop where Ilearned my trade is the most
important place in the world to me.
2 Icreated a great work for someone, and then found
them unworthy to receive it. I'm stilllooking for
someone worthy.
3 Iowe my guild a great debt for forging me into the
person Iam today.
4 Ipursue wealth to secure someone's love.
S One day Iwill return to my guild and prove that Iam
the greatest artisan of them alI.
6 Iwill get revenge on the evil forces that destroyed my
place ofbusiness and ruined my Iivelihood.
d6 Flaw
1 1'11do anything to get my hands on something rare or
priceless.
2 I'm quick to assume that someone Istrying to cheat
me.
3 No one must ever learn that Ionce stole money from
guild coffers.
4 I'm never satished wlth what Ihave-I always want
more.
S Iwould killto acquire a noble title.
6 I'm horribly jealous of anyone who can outshine my
handiwork. Everywhere Igo, I'm surrounded by rivais.
VARIANT GUILD ARTISAN: GUlLD MERCHANT
Instead ofan artisans' guild, you might belong toa
guild oftraders, caravan masters, or shopkeepers. Vou
don't craft items yourself but earn aliving bybuying
and selling lhe works ofothers (orthe raw materiaIs
artisans need topractice lheir craft). Yourguild might
be alarge merchant consortium (orfamily)with
interests across the region. Perhaps you transported
goods from one place toanother, byship, wagon, or
caravan, or bought them from traveling traders and sold
them inyour own little shop. Insome ways, the traveling
merchant's lifelends itself toadventure far more than
the lifeofan artisan.
Rather lhan proficiency with artisan's tools, you might
be proficient with navigator's tools or an additional
language. And instead ofartisan's tools, you can start
with amule and acarl.
PARTIIPERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUND
133
134HERMIT
Vou lived in seclusion-either in a sheltered community
such as a monastery, or entirely aJone-for a formative
part ofyour life. In your time apart from the clamor of
society, you found quiet, solitude, and perhaps some of
the answers you were looking for.
Skill Proficiencies: Medicine, Religion
Tool Proficiencies: Herbalism kit
Languages: One ofyour choice
Equiprnent: Ascroll case stuffed full of notes framyour
studies or prayers, a winter blanket, a set of common
clothes, an herbalism kit, and 5 gp
LIFE OF SECLUSION
What was the reason for your isolation, and what
changed to allow you to end your solitude? Vou can work
with your DM to determine the exact nature of your
seclusion, or you can choose or roll on the table below to
determine the reason behind your seclusion.
d8 LifeofSeclusion
1Iwas searehing forspiritual enlightenment.
2 Iwas partaking ofeommunalliving inaeeordanee with
the dietates ofareligious order.
3 Iwas exiled for aerime Ididn't eommit.
4 Iretreated from soeiety after alife-altering eventod8 LifeofSeclusion
5 Ineeded aquiet plaee towork on myart, literature,
music, ar manifesto.
6 Ineeded toeommune withnature, farfrom civilization.
7 Iwas the earetaker ofan aneient ruin or relie.
8 Iwas apilgrim inseareh ofaperson, plaee, or relieof
spiritual signifieanee.
FEATURE: DISCOVERY
The quiet seclusion ofyour extended hermitage gave you
access to a unique and powerful discovery. The exact
nature of this revelation depends on the nature ofyour
seclusion. It might be a great truth about the cosmos,
the deities, the powerful beings of the outer planes, or
the forces of nature. It could be a site that no one else
has ever seen. Vou might have uncovered a fact that has
long been forgotten, or unearthed some relic of the past
that could rewrite history. It might be information that
would be damaging to the peopJe who or consigned you
to exile, and hence the reason for your return to society.
Work with your DM to determine the details ofyour
discovery and its impact on the campaign.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Some hermits are well suited to a life of seclusion,
whereas others chafe against it and long for company.
Whether they embrace solitude or long to escape it, the
solitary life shapes their attitudes and ideais. A few are
driven slightly mad by their years apart from society.
d8 Personality Trait
1I'vebeen isolated forso long that Irarely speak,
preferring gestures and the oeeasional grunt.
2 Iam utterly serene, even inthe faee ofdisaster.
3 The leader ofmyeommunity had something wise
to sayon every topie, and Iam eager to share
that wisdom.
4 Ifeel tremendous empathy for aliwho sulfer.
5 I'm oblivious to etiquette and soeial expeetations.
6 Ieonneet everything that happens to me to agrand,
eosmie plan.
7 Ioften get lost inmyown thoughts and eontemplation,
beeoming oblivious to mysurroundings.
8 Iam working on agrand philosophieal theory and love
sharing myideas.
d6 Ideal
1Greater Good. Mygifts are meant to be shared with ali,
not used for myown benefit. (Good)
2 Logic.Emotions must not c10udour sense ofwhat is
right and true, or our logieal thinking. (Lawful)
3 FreeThinking. Inquiry and euriosity are the pillars of
progresso ((haotie)
4 Power. Solitude and eontemplation are paths toward
mystieal or magieal power. (Evil)
5 Liveand LetLive.Meddling inthe alfairs ofothers only
eauses trouble. (Neutral)
6 Self.Knowledge. Ifyou know yourself, there's nothing
leftto know. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 Nothingismore important than the other members of
myhermitage, order,orassociation.
2 Ientered sedusion to hidefromthe ones whomight
stillbe hunting me. Imust somedayconfrontthem.
3 I'mstillseekingthe enlightenment Ipursued inmy
sedusion, and itstilleludes me.
4 Ientered sedusion because Ilovedsomeone Icould
nothave.
5 Shouldmydiscoverycometo Iight,itcouldbringruinto
theworld.
6 Myisolationgavemegreatinsightintoagreatevilthat
onlyIcandestroy.
d6 Flaw
1 Nowthat I'vereturned to the world,Ienjoyits delights
a littletoo much.
2 Iharbor dark,bloodthirstythoughts that myisolation
and meditation failedto quell.
3 Iamdogmatic inmythoughts and philosophy.
4 Iletmyneedtowinarguments overshadow
friendships and harmony.
5 I'drisktoo muchto uncovera lost bitofknowledge.
6 Ilikekeepingsecrets and won't share them with
anyone.
OTHER HERMITS
This hermit background assumes a contempla tive sort
of seclusion that allows room for study and prayer. Ifyou
want to play a rugged wilderness recluse who lives off
the land while shunning the company ofother people,
look at the outlander background. On the other hand, if
you want to go in a more religious direction, the acolyte
might be what you're looking for.Or you could even be a
charlatan, posing as a wise and holy person and letting
pious fools support you.
NOBLE
Vouunderstand wealth, power, and privilege. Vou
carrya noble title, and your family owns land, collects
taxes, and wields significant political influence. Vou
might be a pampered aristocrat unfamiliar with
work or discomfort, a former merchant just elevated
to the nobility, or a disinherited scoundrel with a
disproportionate sense ofentitlement. Or you could be
an honest, hard-working landowner who cares deeply
about the people who live and work on your land, keenly
aware ofyour responsibility to them.
Work with your DM to come up with an appropriate
title and determine how much authority that title
carries. Anoble title doesn't stand on its own-it's
connected to an entire family, and whatever title you
hold, you will pass itdown to your own children. Not
only do you need to determine your noble title, but you
should also work with the DM to describe your family
and their influence on you.
Is your family old and established, or was your title
only recently bestowed? How much influence do they
wield, and over what area? What kind of reputationdoes your family have among the other aristocrats of the
region? How do the common people regard them?
What's your position in the family? Are you the heir
to the head of the family? Have you already inherited
the title? How do you feel about that responsibility? Or
are you so far down the line of inheritance that no one
cares what you do, as long as you don't embarrass the
family? How does the head ofyour family feel about
your adventuring career? Are you in your family's good
graces, or shunned by the rest ofyour family?
Does your family have a coat of arms? An insignia you
might wear on a signet ring? Particular colors you wear
all the time? An animal you regard as a symbol ofyour
line or even a spiritual member ofthe family?
These details help establish your family and your title
as features of the world of the campaign.
SkillProficiencies: History, Persuasion
Toal Proficiencies: One type af gaming set
Languages: One ofyour choice
Equiprnent: Aset of fine clothes, a signet ring, a scroll
of pedigree, and a purse containing 25 gp
FEATURE: POSITION OF PRIVILEGE
Thanks to your noble birth, people are inclined to
think the best ofyou. Vouare welcome in high society,
and people assume you have the right to be wherever
you are. The common folk make every effort to
accommodate you and avoid your displeasurc, and other
people of high birth treal you as a member of the same
social sphere. Voucan secure an audience with a local
noble ifyou need to.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Nobles are born and raised to a very different lifestyle
than most people ever experience, and their personalities
reflect that upbringing. Anoble title comes with a
plethora of bonds-responsibilities to family, to other
nobles (including the sovereign), to the people entrusted
to the family's care, or even to the title itself. But this
responsibility is often a good way to undermine a noble.
dS PersonalityTrait
1 Myeloquent ftatterymakeseveryoneItalkto feel
Iikethe most wonderfuland important person inthe
world.
2 Thecommon folklovemeformykindnessand
generosity.
3 Noone coulddoubt bylookingat myregaibearingtha!
Iamacut abovethe unwashed masses.
4 Itakegreat painsto alwayslookmybest and followthe
latest fashions.
5 Idon't liketo ge!myhands dirty,and Iwon't becaught
dead inunsuitableaccommodations.
6 Despitemynoblebirth, Ido not placemyselfabove
other folk.Wealihavethe same blood.
7 Myfavor,once lost, islost forever.
S Ifyoudo mean injury,Iwillcrushyou,ruinyourname,
and saltyourfields.
PART 1IPERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROU"O
135
VARIANT NOBLE: KNIGHT
Aknighthood is among the lowest noble titles in most
societies, but itcan be a path to higher status. ]fyou
wish to be a knight, choose the Retainers feature (see
the sidebar) instead of the Position of Privilege feature.
One ofyour commoner retainers is replaced by a noble
who serves as your squire, aiding you in exchange ford10 Origin d10 Origin
1Forester 6 Bounty hunter
2Trapper 7Pilgrim
3 Homesteader 8 Tribal nomad
4Guide 9Hunter-gatherer
5Exile or outcast 10 Tribal marauderVougrew up in lhe wilds, far from civilization and the
comforts of town and technology. You've witnessed the
migration ofherds larger than forests, survived weather
more extreme than any city-dweller could comprehend,
and enjoyed the solitude of being the only thinking
creature for miles in any direction. The wilds are in
your blood, whether you were a nomad, an explorer, a
reeiuse, a hunter-gatherer, or even a marauder. Even in
places where you don'l know the specific features of the
terrain, you know the ways of the wild.
SkillProficiencies: Athletics, Survival
ToolProficiencies: One type of musical instrumenl
Languages: One ofyour choice
Equiprnent: Astaff, a hunting trap, a trophy from an
animal you killed, a set of traveler's e1othes, and a belt
pouch containing 10gpOUTLANDER
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Often considered rude and uncouth among civilized
folk, outlanders have little respect for the niceties of
life in the cHies. The ties of tribe, e1an, family, and the
natural world ofwhich they are a part are the mosl
important bonds lo most outlanders.training on his or her own path to knighthood. Your two
remaining retainers might inelude a groom to care for
your horse and a servant who polishes your armor (and
even helps you put iton).
As an emblem of chivalry and the ideais ofcourtly
love,you might inelude among your equipment a banner
or other token from a noble lord or lady to whom you
have given your heart-in a chasle sort of devotion.
(This person could be your bond.)
ORIGIN
You've been to strange places and seen things that
others cannot begin to fathom. Consider some of the
distant lands you have visited, and how they impacted
you. Voucan roll on the following table lo delermine
your occupation during your time in the wild, or choose
one that best fits your character.
FEATURE:\¥ANDERER
Vouhave an excellent memory for maps and geography,
and you can always recall the generallayout of terrain,
settlements, and other features around you. In addition,
you can find food and fresh water foryourse]f and up to
fiveother people each day, provided that the land offers
berries, small game, water, and so forth.•..
,.d6 Ideal
1 Respeet. Respeet is due to me beeause of my position,
but ali people regardless of station deserve to be
treated with dignity. (Good)
2 Responsibility. It is my duty to respeet the authority of
those above me, just as those below me must respeet
mine. (Lawful)
3 Independenee. I must prove that Iean handle myself
without the eoddling of my family. (Chaotie)
4 Power. If Iean altain more power, no one will tell me
what to do. (Evil)
5 Family. Blood runs thieker than water. (Any)
6 Noble Obligation. It is my duty to proteet and eare for
the people beneath me. (Good)
d6 Bond
1 Iwill face any ehallenge to win the approval of my
family.
2 My house's allianee with another noble family
must be sustained at ali costs.
3 Nothing is more important than the other members
of my family.
4 Iam in love with the hei r of a family that my family
despises.
5 My loyalty to my sovereign is unwavering.
6 The eommon folk must see me as a hero of the people.
d6 Flaw
1 I secretly believe that everyone is beneath me.
2 I hide a truly seandalous secret that eould ruin my
family forever.
3 Itoe often hear veiled insults and threats in every word
addressed to me, and I'm quiek to anger.
4 I have an insatiable desire for carnal pleasures.
5 In faet, the world does revolve around me.
6 By my words and actions, Ioften bring shame to
my family.
VARIANT FEATURE: RETAINERS
Ifyour character has a noble background, you may select this
background feature instead of Position of Privilege.
You have the service ofthree retainers loyal to your family.
These retainers can be attendants or messengers, and one
might be a majordomo. Your retainers are commoners who
can perform mundane tasks for you, but they do not fight
for you, will not follow you into obviously dangerous areas
(such as dungeons). and willleave ifthey are frequently
endangered or abused.••••
PART I IPERSONALITY AND BACKGROUND
d8 Personality Trait
1 I'm driven by a wanderlust that led me away
from home.
2 Iwateh over my friends as if they were a litter of
newborn pups.
3 Ionee ran twenty-five miles without stopping to warn
to my e1an of an approaehing ore horde. I'd do it again
if I had to.
4 Ihave a lesson for every situation, drawn from
observing nature.
S I plaee no stoek in wealthy or well-mannered folk.
Money and manners won't save you from a hungry
owlbear.
6 I'm always pieking things up, absently fiddling with
them, and sometimes aeeidentally breaking them.
7 Ifeel far more eomfortable around animais than
people.
8 Iwas, in faet, raised by wolves.
d6 Ideal
1 Change. Life is like the seasons, in constant ehange,
and we must ehange with il. (Chaotie)
2 Greater Good. It is eaeh person's responsibility to
make the most happiness for the whole tribe. (Good)
3 Honor. If Idishonor myself, Idishonor my whole
e1an. (Lawful)
4 Might. The strongest are meant to rule. (Evil)
S Nature. The natural world is more important than ali
the eonstruets of eivilization. (Neutral)
6 Glory. I must earn glory in battle, for myself and
myelan. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 My family, e1an, or tribe is the most important thing in
my life, even when they are far from me.
2 An injury to the unspoiled wilderness of my home is an
injury to me.
3 Iwill bring terrible wrath down on the evildoers who
destroyed my homeland.
4 Iam the last of my tribe, and it is up to me to ensure
their names enter legend.
S I suffer awful visions of a eoming disaster and will do
anything to prevent il.
6 It is my duty to provide ehildren to sustain my tribe.
d6 Flaw
1 Iam too enamored of ale, wine, and other intoxieants.
2 There's no room for eaution in a life lived to the fullest.
3 Iremember every insult I've reeeived and nurse a silent
resentment toward anyone who's ever wronged me.
4 Iam slow to trust members of other raees, tribes, and
societies.
S Violenee is my answer to almost any ehallenge.
6 Don't expeet me to save those who ean't save
themselves. It is nature's way that the strong thrive
and the weak perish.SAGE
Vouspent years learning the lore of the multiverse. Vou
scoured manuscripts, studied scrolls, and listened to the
greatest experts on the subjects that interest you. Your
efforts have made you a master in your fields ofstudy.
Skill Proficiencies: Arcana, History
Languages: Two ofyour choice
Equiprnent: Abottle of black ink, a quil!, a small knife,
a letter from a dead colleague posing a question you
have not yet been able to answer, a set of common
clothes, and a belt pouch containing 10 gp
SPECIALTY
To determine the nature ofyour scholarly training, roll a
d8 or choose from the options in the table below.
d8 Specialty d8 Specialty
1Alchemist SProfessor
2Astronomer 6Researeher
3Discredited 7Wizard's apprentiee
aeademie 8Seribe
4Librarian
FEATURE: RESEARCHER
When you atlempt to learn or recall a piece oflore, ifyou
do not know that information, you often know where and
fram whom you can obtain it.Usually, this information
comes from a !ibrary, scriptorium, university, or asage
or other learned person or creature, YourDMmight
rule that the knowledge you seek issecreted away inan
almost inaccessible place, or that itsimply cannot be
found. Unearthing the deepest secrets ofthe multiverse
can require an adventure or even a whole campaign.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Sages are defined bytheir extensive studies, and their
characteristics reflect this !ifeofstudy. Devoted to
scholarly pursuits, a sage values knowledge highly-
sometimes inits own right, sometimes as a means
toward other ideaIs.d8 Personality Trait
1I use polysyllabie words that eonvey lhe impression of
greal erudilion.
2 I've read every book in the world's greatest libraries-
or Ilike to boast that I have.
3 I'm used lo helping oul lhose who aren't as smarl as I
am, and I patiently explain anything and everylhing to
others.
4 There's nothing I like more lhan a good mystery.
SI'm willing to listen to every side of an argumenl before
I make my own judgment.
6 I ... speak ... slowly ... when talking to idiolS, .
whieh ... almosl ... everyone ... is eompared .
to me.
7 I am horribly, horribly awkward in social situalions.
8 I'm eonvineed thal people are always trying to steal my
secrets.
d6 Ideal
1 Knowledge. The path to power and self-improvement
is through knowledge. (Neutral)
2 Beauty. What is beautiful points us beyond itself
toward what is true. (Good)
3 logie. Emotions must not c10ud our logieal lhinking.
(lawful)
4 No Limits. Nothing should fetter the infinite possibility
inherent in ali existenee. ((haotie)
SPower. Knowledge is the path to power and
domination. (Evil)
6 Self.lmprovement. The goal of a life of study is the
betterment of oneself. (Any)
d6 Bond
1 It is my duty to proteet my students.
2 I have an aneient text that holds terrible secrets that
must not fali into the wrong hands.
3 Iwork to preserve a library, university, scriptorium,
ar monastery.
4 My life's work is a series of tomes related to a speeifie
field of lore.
S I've been searehing my whole life for the answer to a
certa in questiono
6 I sold my sou Ifor knowledge. I hope to do great deeds
and win it baek.
d6 Flaw
1 Iam easily distraeted by the promise of information.
2 Most people scream and run when they see a demon. I
stop and take notes on its anatomy.
3 Unloeking an aneient mystery is worth the priee of a
civilization.
4 Ioverlook obvious solutions in favor of eomplieated
ones.
S I speak without really thinking through my words,
invariably insulting others.
6 Iean't keep a seeret to save my life, or anyone else's.
VARIANT FEATURE: BAD REPUTATION
Ifyour characler has a sailorbackground, you may selecl Ihis
background fealure inslead ofShip's Passage.
No malter where you go, people are afraid of you due lo
your repulalion. When you are in a civilized seltlement, you
can gel away wilh minor criminal offenses, such as refusing
to pay for food at a tavern ar breaking down doors at a local
shop, since mosl people willnol reporl your aclivily lo lhe
aulhorilies.d6 Flaw
1 Ifollow orders, even ifIIhink Ihey're wrong.
2 1'11 say anylhing lo avoid having lo do exlra work.
3 Once someone queslions mycourage, Inever back
down no maller how dangerous lhe silualion.
4 Once Islarl drinking, il's hard for me lo slop.
5 Ican'l help but pockel loose coins and olher Irinkels I
come across.
6 Mypride will probably lead lo mydeslruclion.
VARIANT SAILOR: PIRATE
Vou spent your youlh under the sway of a dread pirate,
a ruthless cutthroat who taught you how to survive in a
worId of sharks and savages. You've indulged in larceny
on the high seas and sent more than one deserving soul
to a briny grave. Fear and bloodshed are no strangers
to you, and you've garnered a somewhal unsavory
reputation in many a port town.
If you decide thal your sailing career involved piracy,
you can choose the Bad Reputalion feature (see sidebar)
instead of the Ship's Passage feature.d6 Bond
1 I'm loyallo my captain first, everything else second.
2 The ship is mosl important-crewmates and caplains
come and go.
3 1'11 always remember my firsl ship.
4 Ina harbor lown, Ihave a paramour whose eyes nearly
slole me from lhe sea.
5 Iwas chealed oul of my fair share of lhe profils, and I
wanl lo gel my due.
6 Rulhless pirales murdered mycaplain and crewmales,
plundered our ship, and lefl me lo die. Vengeance will
be mine.
•• •••d6 Ideal
1 Respecl. The Ihing Ihal keeps a ship logelher is mulual
respecl belween caplain and crew. (Good)
2 Fairness. We alido lhe work, so we ali share inlhe
rewards. (Lawful)
3 Freedom. The sea is freedom-Ihe freedom lo go
anywhere and do anything. (Chaolic)
4 Maslery. I'm a predalor, and lhe olher ships on lhe sea
are my prey. (Evil)
5 People. I'm committed lo my crewmales, not lo ideais.
(Neulral)
6 Aspiralion. Someday 1'11own my own ship and charl
myown desliny. (Any)
FEATURE: SHIP'S PASSAGE
When you need to, you can secure free passage on
a sailing ship for yourself and your adventuring
companions. Vou might sail on the ship you served on,
or another ship you have good relations with (perhaps
one captained bya former crewmate). Because you're
calling in a favor, you can't be certain of a schedule or
route that wiII meet your every need. Your Dungeon
Master wiII determine how long it takes to get where
you need to go. In return for your free passage, you
and your companions are expected to assist the crew
during the voyage.SAILOR
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Sailors can be a rough lot, but the responsibilities of
life on a ship make them generally reliable as welI. Life
aboard a ship shapes their outlook and forms their most
important attachments.
d8 Personalily Trail
1 Myfriends know they can relyon me, no matter what.
2 Iwork hard so that Ican play hard when lhe work
is done.
Ienjoy sailing inlo new porls and making new friends
over a flagon of ale.
4 Islrelch lhe Irulh for lhe sake of a good slory.
5 To me, a lavem brawl is a nice waylo gel lo know a
new cily.
6 Inever pass up a friendly wager.
7 Mylanguage isas foul as an olyugh nesl.
8 Ilike a job well done, especially ifIcan convince
someone else lo do il.Vou sailed on a seagoing vessel for years. In that
time, you faced down mighty storms, monsters of the
deep, and those who wanted to sink your craft to the
bottomless depths. Your first love is the distant line of
the horizan, but the time has come to try your hand
at something new.
Discuss the nature of the ship you previously sailed
with your Dungeon Master. Was it a merchant ship,
a naval vessel, a ship of discovery, or a pirate ship?
How famous (or infamous) is it? Is it widely traveled?
Is it stiII sailing, or is it missing and presumed lost
with ali hands?
What were your duties on board-boatswain, capta in,
navigator, cook, or some other position? Who were the
captain and first mate? Did you leave your ship on good
terms with your fellows, or on the run?
Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Perception
Tool Proficiencies: Navigator's tools, vehides (water)
Equipment: A belaying pin (dub), 50feet of silk rope,
a lucky charm such as a rabbit foot or a small stone
with a hole in the center (or you may roll for a random
trinket on the Trinkets table in chapter 5),a set of
common dothes, and a belt pouch containing 10 gp
•• ••
PART 1 PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUNO[39
SOLDIER
War has been your !ife for as long as you care to
remember. Vou trained as ayouth, studied the use of
weapons and armor, learned basic survival techniques,
including how to stay a!ive on the battlefield. Vou
might have been part ofa standing national army or a
mercenary company, or perhaps a member ofa local
militia who rose to prominence during a recent war.
When you choose this background, work with your
DMto determine which military organization you were
a part of,how far through its ranks you progressed, and
what kind ofexperiences you had during your mi!itary
career. Was ita standing army, a town guard, or a village
militia? Or it might have been a noble's or merchant's
private army, or a mercenary company.
SkillProficiencies: Athletics, Intimidation
TooI Proficiencies: One type ofgaming set,
vehicles (Iand)
Equiprnent: An insignia ofrank, a trophy taken from
a fallen enemy (a dagger, broken blade, or piece ofa
banner), a set of bone dice or deck ofcards, a set of
common clothes, and a beIt pouch containing 10gpSPECIALTY
During your time as a soldier, you had a specific role to
pIay in your unit or army. Roll a d8 or choose from the
options in the table below to determine your role:
d8 Specially d8 Specially
1Officer 6Quartermasler
2Scoul 7Standard bearer
3Infanlry 8Supporl slaff (cook,
4Cavalry blacksmilh, or lhe
5Healer like)
FEATURE: MILITARY RANK
Vouhave a military rank from your career as a soldier.
SoIdiers loyal toyour former military organization
still recognize your authority and inftuence, and they
defer toyou ifthey are ofa Iower rank. Voucan invoke
your rank to exert inftuence over other soldiers and
requisition simple equipment or horses for temporary
use. Voucan aIso usually gain access to friendly
military encampments and fortresses where your
rank is recognized.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
The horrors ofwar combined with the rigid discipline of
military service leave their mark on ali soldiers, shaping
their ideais, creating strong bonds, and often leaving
them scarred and vuInerable to fear, shame, and hatred.
d8 Personalily Trail
1 I'm always polite and respectfu!'
2 I'm haunled by memories of war. Ican't gel lhe images
of violence oul of my mind.
I've lost too many friends, and I'm slow lo make new
one$.
4 I'm full ofinspiring and caulionary lales from my
mililary experience relevant to almosl every combat
situation.
5 Ican stare down a hell hound without flinching.
6 Ienjoy being slrong and like breaking lhings.
7 Ihave a crude sense of humor.
8 Iface problems head.on. A simple, direcl solulion is
lhe besl path to success.
d6 Ideal
1 Grealer Good. Our 101is lo lay down our lives in
defense of others. (Good)
2 Responsibilily. Ido what I must and obey just
authorily. (Lawful)
3 Independence. When people follow orders blindly, they
embrace a kind of tyranny. (Chaolic)
4 Might. In life as in war, the slronger force wins. (Evil)
5 Live and Let Live. Ideais aren't worth killing over or
going to war for. (Neutral)
6 Nalion. My city, nalion, or people are allthal malter.
(Any)
d6 Bond
1 Iwould stilllay down my lifefor the people I
served with.
2 Someone saved my lifeon the battlefield. Tothis day, I
will never leave a friend behind.
3 Myhonor is my life.
41'11never forget the crushing defeat my company
suffered or the enemies who dealt il.
S Those who fight beside me are those worth dying for.
6 Ifight for those who cannot fight for themselves.
d6 Flaw
1 The monstrous enemy we faced in battle stillleaves
me quivering with fear.
2 Ihave little respect for anyone who is not a
proven warrior.
3 Imade a terrible mistake in battle cost many lives-
and Iwould do anything to keep that mistake secrel.
4 Myhatred of my enemies is blind and unreasoning.
S Iobey the law, even ifthe law causes misery.
6 I'd rather eat my armor than admit when I'm wrong.
URCHIN
Vou grew up on the streets alone, orphaned, and poor.
Vou had no one to watch over you or to provide for
you, so you learned to provide for yourself. Vou fought
fiercely over food and kept a constant watch out for other
desperate souls who might steal from you. Vou slept on
rooftops and in alleyways, exposed to the elements, and
endured sickness without the advantage of medicine or
a place to recuperate. You've survived despi te ali odds,
and did so through cunning, strength, speed, or some
combination of each.
Vou begin your adventuring career with enough
money to live modestly but securely for at least ten days.
How did you come by that money? What allowed you to
break free of your desperate circumstances and embark
on a better life?
Skill Proficiencies: Sleight of Hand, Stealth
Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit, thieves' tools
Equiprnent: A small knife, a map of the city you
grew up in, a pet mouse, a token to remember your
parents by, a set of common clothes, and a belt pouch
containing 10 gp
FEATURE: CITY SECRETS
Vou know the secret patterns and flow to cities and can
find passages through the urban sprawl that others would
miss. When you are not in combat, you (and companions
you lead) can travei between any two locations in the city
twice as fast as your speed would normally allow.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Urchins are shaped by lives of desperate poverty, for
good and for ill. They tend to be driven either by a
commitment to the people with whom they shared life
00the street or by a burning desire to find a better life-
and maybe get some payback on ali the rich people who
treated them badly.d8 Personalily Trail
1 Ihide scraps offood and lrinkels away in my pockets.
2 Iask a lot of queslions.
3 Ilikelo squeeze inlo small places where no one else
can gello me.
4 Isleep wilh my back to a wall or tree, with everylhing I
own wrapped in a bundle in my arms.
S Ieat likea pig and have bad manners.
6 Ithink anyone who's nice to me is hiding evil intento
7 Idon't liketo bathe.
8 Iblunlly say what olher people are hinling aI ar hiding.
d6 Ideal
1 Respecl. Alipeople, rich ar poor, deserve respect.
(Good)
2 Communily. We have to take care of each other,
because no one else is going to do il. (Lawful)
3 Change. The low are lifted up, and the high and mighty
are brought down. Change is the nature oflhings. .
(Chaolic)
4 Relribulion. The rich need to be shown what lifeand
death are like in the gutters. (Evil)
S People. Ihelp the people who help me-that's what
keeps us alive. (Neutral)
6 Aspiration. I'm going to prove that I'm worthy of a
better life.
d6 Bond
1 Mytown ar city is my home, and 1'11 fight to defend il.
2 Isponsor an orphanage to keep others from enduring
what Iwas forced to endure.
3 Iowe my survival to another urchln who taught me to
liveon the streets.
4 Iowe a debt Ican never repay to the person who took
pity on me.
S Iescaped my lifeof poverty byrobbing an important
person, and I'm wanted for il.
6 No one else should have to endure the hardships I've
been through.
d6 Flaw
1 IfI'm outnumbered, Iwillrun away from a fighl.
2 Gold seems likea lot of money to me, and 1'11do just
about anything for more of il.
3 Iwill never fullytrust anyone other than myself.
4 I'd rather killsomeone in their sleep then fight fair.
S It's not stealing if Ineed It more than someone else.
6 People who can't take care of themselves get what they
deserve.
PART 1IPERSONALlTY A. oBACKGROU '0
143PART I EQUIPME. TCoin cp sp epgp pp
Copper (cp) 1 1/10 l/50 1/100 1/1,000
Silver (sp) 10 1 1/51/101/100
Eleclrum (ep) 50 5 1 1/2 1/20
Gold (gp) 100 10 2 11/10
Platinum (pp) 1,000 10020 10 1Members oflhe nobilily lrade eilher inlegal righls, such
as lhe righls loamine, aporl, or farmland, oringold
bars, measuring goldbylhe pound ralher than bylhe
coin. Onlymerchanls, advenlurers, and lhose offering
prafessional services forhire commonly deal incoins.
Common coins come inseveral differenl denominalions
based on lhe relalive worlh ofthe melai fram which lhey
are made. The lhree mosl common coins are lhe gold
piece (gp),lhe silver piece (sp),and lhe copper piece (cp).
Wilh one goldpiece, acharacter can buy abelt
pouch, 50 feel ofgood rape, or agoat. Askilled (bUl
nol exceplional) arlisan can earn one goldpiece aday.
The goldpiece islhe slandard unil ofmeasure for
weallh, even iflhe coin ilself isnolcommonly used.
When merchanls discuss deals lhal involve goods or
services worlh hundreds or thousands ofgoldpieces,
lhe lransaclions don'l usually involve lhe exchange of
individual coins. Ralher, lhe goldpiece isastandard
measure ofvalue, and lhe aclual exchange isingold
bars, letters ofcredil, orvaluable goods.
One goldpiece isworlh len silver pieces, the mosl
prevalenl coin among commoners. Asilver piece buys a
laborer's work foraday,aflask oflamp oil,or anight's
rest inapoor inn.
One silver piece isworlh len copper pieces, which are
common among laborers and beggars. Asingle copper
piece buys acandle, alorch, or apiece ofchalk.
Inaddition, unusual coins made ofother precious
metais somelimes appear inlreasure hoards. The
eleclrum piece (ep)and lhe plalinum piece (pp)originale
from fallen empires and losl kingdoms, and lhey
sometimes arause suspicion and skepticism when used
inlransactions. An eleclrum piece isworth fivesilver
pieces, and aplalinum piece isworlh len goldpieces.
Astandard coin weighs about alhird ofan ounce,
so fiftycoins weigh apound.COINAGE
STANDARD EXCHANGE RATESClass Funds
Barbarian 2d4 x 10gp
Bard 5d4 x 10gp
Cleric 5d4 x 10gp
Druid 2d4 x 10gp
Fighter 5d4 x 10gp
Monk 5d4 gp
Paladin 5d4xl0gp
Ranger 5d4xl0gp
Rogue 4d4x10gp
Sorcerer 3d4 x 10gp
Warlock 4d4 x 10gp
Wizard 4d4 x 10gpCHAPTER 5:EQUIPMENT
~
STARTING EQUIPMENT
When you creale your characler, you receive equipment
based on acombinalion ofyour class and background.
Alternatively, you can starl with anumber ofgoldpieces
based onyour class and spend them on items fram lhe
lisls inthis chapter. See the Slarling Weallh byClass
table lodetermine how much goldyou have lospend.
Voudecide howyour characler carne bylhis starting
equipment. IImighl have been an inherilance, or goods
lhat thecharacler purchased during hisorherupbringing.
Voumight havebeen equipped withaweapon, armor, and
abackpack aspart ofmilitary service. Voumighl evenhave
stolen your gear. Aweapon could beafamily heirloom,
passed down fram generalion lOgeneralion unlil your
characler finally look up lhe mantle and followed inan
anceslor's advenlurous footsteps.
STARTlNG WEALTH BY CLASSHE MARKETPLACE OF A LARCE CITY TEEMS
with buyers and sellers ofmany sorts:
dwarf smiths and elfwoodcarvers, halfling
farmers and gnomejewelers, nottomention
humans ofeveryshape, size, and color
drawn fram aspectrum ofnations and
cultures. Inthe largest cities, almost
anything imaginable isoffered forsale, fram exotic
spices and luxurious clothing towicker baskets and
practical swords.
For an adventurer, the availability ofarmor, weapons,
backpacks, rape, and similar goods isofparamount
importance, since praper equipmenl can mean lhe
difference belween lifeand dealh inadungeon or the
unlamed wilds. This chapter delails the mundane and
exolicmerchandise lhal adventurers commonly finduseful
inlhe faceoflhe lhreats lhal the worlds of 0&0present.
Weallh appears inmany forms ina 0&0world. Coins,
gemslones, lrade goods, art objecls, animais, and
praperly can reftecl your characler's financiai well-being.
Members oflhe peasanlry trade ingoods, barlering for
whal lhey need and paying laxes ingrain and cheese.WEALTH
SELLING TREASURE
ARMOR AND SHIELDSOpportunities abound to find treasure, equipment,
weapons, armar, and more in the dungeons you explore.
Normally, you can sell your treasures and trinkets when
you return toa town ar other setllement, provided that you
can find buyers and merchants interested in your 1001.
Arms, Armor, and Other Equipment. As a general
rule, undamaged weapons, armar, and other equipment
fetch half their cost when sold in a market. Weapons
and armor used by monsters are rarely in good enough
condition to sell.
MagicItems. Selling magic items is prablematic.
Finding someone to buy a potion or a scroll isn't toa
hard, but other ilems are out ofthe realm ofmost but the
wealthiest nobles. Likewise, aside fram a few common
magic items, you won't normally come across magic
items ar spells to purchase. The value of magic is far
beyond simple gold and should always be treated as such.
Gems,jewe1ry, and Art Objects. These items retain
their full value in the marketplace, and you can either
trade them in for coin ar use them as currency for other
lransactions. For exceptionally valuable treasures, the
DMmight require you to find a buyer in a large town ar
larger community first.
Trade Goods. On the borderlands, many people
conduct transactions through barter. Like gems and art
objects, trade goods-bars of iran, bags ofsalt, Iivestock,
and so on-relain lheir full value in the market and can
be used as currency.
D&D worlds are a vast tapestry made up ofmany
different cultures, each with its own technology leveI.
For this reason, adventurers have access to a variety
ofarmor types, ranging from leather armor to chain
mail to costly plate armar, with several other kinds of
armor in between. The Armor table collects the most
commonly available types ofarmar found in the game
and separates them into three calegories: light armor,
medium armar, and heavy armar. Many warriors
supplement their armar with a shield.
•• ••The Armar table shows the cost, weight, and other
properties ofthe common lypes ofarmor worn in the
worlds of D&D.
Armor Proficiency. Anyone can put on a suit ofarmar
ar strap a shield to an armo Only those praficient in the
armor's use know how to wear it effectively, however.
Your class gives you praficiency with certain types of
armor.lfyou wear armor that you lack proficiency with,
you have disadvantage on any ability check, saving
thraw, ar atlack roll that involves Strength or Dexterity,
and you can't cast spells.
Armor Class (AC). Armar protects its wearer fram
atlacks. The armar (and shield) you wear determines
your base Armar Class.
Heavy Armor. Heavier armor interferes with the
wearer's ability to move quickly, stealthily, and freely.
lf the Armor table shows "Str 13" ar "Str 15" in the
Strength column for an armar type, the armar reduces
the wearer's speed by 10feet unless the wearer has a
Strength score equal to or higher than the listed score.
Stealth.lf the Armar table shows "Disadvanlage" in
the Stealth column, the wearer has disadvantage on
Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
Shields.Ashield is made fram wood ar metal and
is carried in one hand. Wielding a shield increases
your Armar Class by2. Voucan benefit from only one
shield at a time.
LIGHTARMOR
Made fram supple and thin materiais, light armor favors
agile adventurers since itoffers some pratection without
sacrificing mobility. Ifyou wear light armar, you add
your Dexterity modifier to the base number from your
armar type to determine your Armar Class.
Padded.Padded armar consists ofquilted layers of
cloth and batting.
Leather. The breastplate and shoulder protectors of
this armor are made of leather that has been stiffened
bybeing boiled in oil. The rest ofthe armar is made of
softer and more flexible materiaIs.
Studded Leather. Made from tough but flexible
leather, studded leather is reinforced with close-set
rivets ar spikes .
VARIANT: EQUIPMENT SIZES
In most campaigns, you can use ar wear any equipment that
you find on your adventures, within the bounds of common
sense. For example, a burly haif.orc won't fit in a halfling's
leather armar, and a gnome would be swallowed up in a
c10ud giant's elegant robe.
The DM can impose more realism. For example, a suit of
plate armar made for one human might not fit another one
without significant alterations, and a guard's uniform mighl
be visibly ill.fitting when an adventurer tries to wear it as a
disguise.
Using this variant, when adventurers find armar, c1othing.
and similar items that are made to be worn, they might need
to visit an armorsmith, tailor, leatherworker, ar similar exper!
to make the item wearable. The cost for such work varies
from 10 to 40 percent ofthe market price ofthe item. The
DM can either rollld4 x 10 ar determine the increase in cost
based on the extent of the alterations required.
•••• --------------------- •. r
PART 1IEQUIPMENTMEDIUM ARMOR
Medium armar offers more pratection than light armar,
but ilalso impairs movement more.lfyou wear medium
armor, you add your Dexlerity modifier, to a maximum
of+2, to the base number fram your armor type to
determine your Armar Class.
Hide.This crude armor consists ofthick furs and
pelts. lt is commonly worn bybarbarian tribes, evil
humanoids, and other folkwho lack access to the tools
and materiaIs needed lOcreate betler armor.
Chain Shirt. Made of interlocking metal rings, a chain
shirl is worn belween layers ofclothing ar leather. This
armor offers modest protection to the wearer's upper
body and allows lhe sound ofthe rings rubbing against
one another to be muffled byouter layers.
ScaleMail.This armar consists ofa coat and leggings
(and perhaps a separate skirt) ofleather covered with
overlapping pieces of metal, much like the scales ofa
fish, The suit includes gauntlets,
Breastp/ate. This armor consists of a fitted metal
chest piece worn with supple leather, Although it leaves
the legs and arms relatively unprotected, this armor
provides good protection for the wearer's vital organs
while leaving the wearer relatively unencumbered,
Ha/fP/ate. Half plate consists ofshaped metal plates
that cover most of the wearer's body, 1tdoes not include
leg protection beyond simple greaves that are attached
with leather straps.
HEAVY ARMOR
Of al1the armor categories, heavy armor offers the best
protection. These suits of armor cover the entire body
and are designed to stop a wide range of attacks. Only
proficient warriors can manage their weight and bulk.
Heavy armor doesn't let you add your Dexterity
modifier to your Armor Class, but it also doesn't
penalize you ifyour Dexterity modifier is negative.
Ring Mail. This armor is leather armor with heavy
rings sewn into it. The rings he1preinforce the armor
against blows from swords and axes. Ring mail is
inferior to chain mail, and it"susual1y worn only by those
who can't afford better armor.
Chain Mail. Made of interlocking metal rings, chain
mail includes a layer of quilted fabric worn underneath
themail to prevent chafing and to cushion the impact of
blows. The suit includes gauntlets.
Splint.This armor is made of narrow vertical strips
of metal riveted to a backing of leather that is worn over
c10th padding. Flcxible chain mail protects the joints.
P/ate.Plate consists ofshaped, interlocking metal
plates to cover the entire body. Asuit of plate includes
gauntlets, heavy leather boots, a visored helmet, and
thick layers of padding underneath the armor. Buckles
and straps distribute the weight over the body.
ARMOR
Armor Cost Armor Class (AC) Strength Stealth Weight
LightArmor
Padded 5 gp 11 + Dex modifier Disadvantage 81b.
Leather 10 gp 11 + Dex modifier 101b.
Studded leather 45 gp 12 + Dex modifier 13lb.
Medium Armor
Hide 10 gp 12 + Dex modifier (max 2) 121b.
Chain shirt 50 gp 13 + Dex modifier (ma x 2) 201b.
Seale mai! 50 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) Disadvantage 451b.
Breastplate 400 gp 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) 201b.
Half plate 750 gp 15 + Dex modifier (max 2) Disadvantage 401b.
HeavyArmor
Ring mail 30 gp 14 Disadvantage 401b.
Chain mail 75 gp 16 Str 13 Disadvantage 551b.
Splint 200 gp 17 Str 15 Disadvantage 601b.
Plate 1,500 gp 18 Str 15 Disadvantage 651b.
Shield
Shield 10 gp +2 61b.
PART 1 EQUIPMENT
'45
PARTIIEQUIPMENTGETTING INTo AND OUT OFARMOR
The lime illakes lo don or doffarmor depends on lhe
armor's calegory.
Don.This is lhe lime it takes lo pul on armor. Vou
benefil from lhe armor's AConly ifyou lake lhe full lime
lOdon lhe suil ofarmor.
Dolf.This is lhe lime illakes lo lake offarmor. lfyou
have help, reduce lhis time byhalf.
DONNING ANO DOFFING ARMOR
Category Oon Ooff
Lighl Armor 1 minute 1 minute
Medium Armor 5minutes 1 minute
Heavy Armor 10 minutes 5minutes
Shield 1action 1action
WEAPONS
Your class granls proficiency in cerlain weapons,
reflecling boIh lhe class's focus and lhe lools you are
mosl likely lo use. Whelher you favor a longsword or
a longbow, your weapon and your abilily lowield il
effeclively can mean lhe difference belween tifeand
dealh while advenluring.
The Weapons lable shows lhe mosl common weapons
used in lhe worlds of0&0, lheir price and weighl,
lhe damage lhey deal when lhey hil, and any special
properlies lhey possesso Every weapon is classified
as eilher melee or ranged. A melee weapon is used lo
attack a largel wilhin 5feel ofyou, whereas a ranged
weaponis used loattack a largel aI a dislance.
WEAPON PROFICIENCY
Your race, class, and feals can granl you proficiency
wilh cerlain weapons or calegories ofweapons. The lwo
calegories are simpleandmartial.Mosl people can
use simpIeweapons wilh proficiency. These weapons
include clubs, maces, and olher weapons oflen found in
lhe hands ofcommoners. Marlial weapons, including
swords, axes, and polearms, require more speciatized
lraining lOuse effeclively. Mosl warriors use marlial
weapons because lhese weapons pul their fighling slyle
and lraining lo besl use.
Proficiency wilh aweapon allows you lo add your
proficiency bonus lo lhe atlack roll forany attack you
make wilh lhat weapon. Ifyou make an atlack roll using
a weapon wilh which you lack proficiency, you do nol
add your proficiency bonus lo lhe atlack roll.
WEAPON PROPERTIES
Manyweapons have special properlies relaled lolheir use,
as shown inlhe Weapons lable.
Ammunition. Voucan use a weapon lhal has lhe
ammunilion properly lomake a ranged attack only if
you have ammunilion lo fire from lhe weapon. Each
time you atlack wilh lhe weapon, you expend one piece
ofammunilion. Orawing lhe ammunition from a quiver,
case, or olher conlainer is parI oflhe atlack. AIlhe
end oflhe baltle, you can recover half your expended
ammunilion bylaking a minule lo search lhe battlefield.
Ifyou use a weapon that has the ammunition property
to make a melee attack, you treat the weapon as an
improvised weapon (see "Improvised Weapons" later in
the section). A sling must be loaded to deal any damage
when used in this way.
Finesse. When making an attack with a finesse
weapon, you use your choice of your Strength or
Dexterity modifier for the attack and damage rolls. Vou
must use the same modifier for both rolls.
Heavy. Small creatures have disadvantage on attack
rolls with heavy weapons. A heavy weapon's size and
bulk make it toa large for a Small creature to use
effectively.
Light. A light weapon is small and easy to handle,
making it ideal for use when fighting with two weapons.
See the rules for two-weapon fighting in chapter 9.
Loading. Because of the time required to load this
weapon, you can fire only one piece of ammunition
from it when you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
to fire it, regardless of the number of attacks you can
normally make.
Range. A weapon that can be used to make a ranged
attack has a range shown in parentheses after the
ammunition or thrown property. The range lists two
numbers. The first is the weapon's normal range in feet,
and the second indicates the weapon's maximum range.
When attacking a target beyond normal range, you have
disadvantage on the attack rolI.Vou can't attack a target
beyond the weapon's long range.
Reach. This weapon adds 5 feet to your reach when
you attack with it.
Special. A weapon with the special property has
unusual rules governing its use, explained in the
weapon's description (see "Special Weapons" later in
this section).
Thrown. If a weapon has the thrown property, you
can throw the weapon to make a ranged attack. If the
weapon is a melee weapon, you use the same ability
modifier for that attack roll and damage roll that you
would use for a melee attack with the weapon. For
example, ifyou throw a handaxe, you use your Strength,
but if you throw a dagger, you can use either your
Strength or your Dexterity, since the dagger has the
finesse property.
Two.Handed. This weapon requires two hands to use.
Versatile. This weapon can be used with one or two
hands. A damage value in parentheses appears with the
property-the damage when the weapon is used with
two hands to make a melee attack.".
IMPROVISED WEAPONS
Sometimes characters don't have their weapons and
have to attack with whatever is dose at hand. An
improvised weapon indudes any object you can wield
in one or two hands, such as broken glass, a table leg, a
frying pan, a wagon wheel, or a dead goblin.
In many cases, an improvised weapon is similar
to an actual weapon and can be treated as such. For
example, a table leg is akin to a dub. At the DM's option.
a character proficient with a weapon can use a similar
object as if it were that weapon and use his or her
proficiency bonus./-
PART 1 EQUIPMENT
147
'4.8Anobject that bears no resemblance toaweapon
deals ld4 damage (the DMassigns adamage type
appropriate tothe object). Iracharacler uses aranged
weapon lomake amelee atlack, or throws amelee
weapon that does not have the thrown property, italso
deals ld4 damage. Animprovised thrown weapon has a
normal range of20 feetand along range of60 feet.
SILVERED WEAPONS
Some monsters that have immunity or resistance
tononmagical weapons are susceptible tosilver
weapons, so caulious adventurers invest extra coin to
plate their weapons with silver. Voucan silver asingle
weapon or ten pieces ofammunition for 100gp.This
cost represents not onlythe price ofthe silver, but the
time and expertise needed toadd silver tothe weapon
without making itless effective.
SPECIAL WEAPONS
Weapons with special rules are described here.
Lance.Vouhave disadvantage when you use alance
toattack atarget within 5feet ofyou.Also, alance
requires two hands towield when you aren't mounted.
Net.ALarge or smaller creature hit byanet is
restrained until itisfreed. Anet has noeffect on
PART1IEQUIPMENTcreatures that are formless, or creatures that are Huge
or larger. Acreature can use itsaction tomake aDC 10
Strength check, freeing itself or another creature within
itsreach on asuccess. Dealing 5slashing damage tothe
net (AC10)also frees the creature without harming it,
ending the effect and destroying the net.
When you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
toatlack with anet, you can make onlyone attack
regardless ofthe number ofattacks you can
normally make.
AnVENTURING GEAR
This section describes items that have special rules or
require further explanation.
Acid.Asan action, youcan splash the contents of
this vial onto acreature within 5feet ofyou orthrow
the vial up to20 feet, shattering iton impact. Ineither
case, make aranged attack against acreature or object,
treating the acid as an improvised weapon. Onahit, the
target takes 2d6 acid damage.
Alchemist's Fire. This sticky, adhesive fluidignites
when exposed toair. Asan action, youcan throw this
flask upto20 feet, shattering iton impact. Make a
ranged attack against acreature or object, treating
Name Cost Damage Weight Properties
Simp!e Melee Weapons
Club 1sp1d4 bludgeoning 21b. Light
Dagger 2 gp 1d4 piercing 1 Ib.Finesse, light, thrown (range 20/60)
Greatclub 2sp 1d8 bludgeoning 101b. Two-handed
Handaxe 5 gp 1d6slashing 21b. Light, thrown (range 20/60)
Javelin 5 sp1d6 piercing 21b. Thrown (range 30/120)
Light hammer 2 gp 1d4 bludgeoning 21b. Light, thrown (range 20/60)
Mace 5gp1d6 bludgeoning 41b.
Quarterstaff 2sp 1d6 bludgeoning 41b. Versatile (1d8)
Sickle 1 gp1d4 slashing 21b. Light
Spear 1 gp1d6 piercing 3 Ib.Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (ld8)
Unarmed strike 1 bludgeoning
Simp!e Ranged Weapons
Crossbow, light 25 gpld8 piercing 51b.Ammunition (range 80/320), loading, two.handed
Dart 5 cp1d4 piercing 1/4Ib. Finesse, thrown (range 20/60)
Shortbow 25 gp1d6 piercing 21b.Ammunition (range 80/320), two.handed
Sling 1sp1d4 bludgeoning Ammunition (range 30/120)
Martia! Melee Weapons
Battleaxe 10 gp1d8slashing 41b.Versatile (ld10)
Flail 10 gp1d8 bludgeoning 21b.
Glaive 20 gp1dl Oslashing 61b.Heavy, reach, two-handed
Greataxe 30 gp1d12 slashing 71b.Heavy, two-handed
Greatsword 50 gp2d6slashing 61b.Heavy, two.handed
Halberd 20 gp1d10 slashing 61b.Heavy, reach, two.handed
Lance 10 gp1d12 piercing 61b.Reach, special
Longsword 15gp1d8 slashing 31b. Versatile (ldl0)
Maul 10 gp2d6 bludgeoning 101b. Heavy, two.handed
Morningstar 15gp1d8 piercing 41b.
Pike 5 gp1d10 piercing 181b. Heavy, reach, two.handed
Rapier 25 gp1d8 piercing 21b.Finesse
Scimitar 25 gp1d6slashing 31b.Finesse, light
Shortsword 10 gp1d6 piercing 21b. Finesse, light
Trident 5gpld6 piercing 41b. Thrown (range 20/60), versatile (ld8)
War pick 5gp ld8 piercing 21b.
Warhammer 15gp 1d8 bludgeoning 21b. Versatile (ld10)
Whip 2 gp1d4slashing 31b. Finesse, reach
Martial Ranged Weapons
Blowgun 10 gp1 piercing 11b. Ammunition (range 25/100), loading
Crossbow, hand 75 gp 1d6 piercing 31b.Ammunition (range 30/120), light, loading
Crossbow, heavy 50 gp 1dlO piercing 181b. Ammunition (range 100/400), heavy, loading, two.handed
Longbow 50 gp1d8 piercing 21b.Ammunition (range 150/600), heavy, two-handed
Ne! 1gp 31b. Special, thrown (range 5/15)
PARl I EQUIPMENT149
Item Cost Weight Item Cost Weight
Abacus 2 gp 21b.Ho/y symbo/
Acid (vial) 25 gp 1 Ib. Amulet 5 gp 1 Ib.
Alchemist's fire (flask) 50 gp 1 Ib. Emblem 5 gp
Ammunition Reliquary 5 gp 21b.
Arrows (20) 1 gp 1 Ib. Holy water (flask) 25 gp llb.
Blowgun needles (50) 1 gp llb. Hourglass 25 gp 1 Ib.
Crossbow bolts (20) 1 gp 1
'/2Ib. Hunting trap 5 gp 251b.
Sling bullets (20) 4 cp 1'/2 Ib. Ink (1 ounce bottle) 10 gp
Antitoxin (vial) 50 gp Ink pen 2 cp
ArcaneJocus Jug or pitcher 2 cp
Crystal 10 gp llb. Ladder (10-foot) 1 sp
Orb 20 gp 31b. Lamp 5 sp
Rod 10 gp 21b. Lantern, bullseye 10 gp
Staff 5 gp 41b. Lantern, hooded 5 gp
Wand 10 gp llb. Lock 10 gp
Backpack 2 gp 51b. Magnifying glass 100 gp
Ball bearings (bag of 1 000) 1 gp 21b. Manacles 2 gp
Barrei 2 gp 701b. Mess kit 2 sp
Basket 4 sp 21b. Mirror, steel 5 gp
Bedroll 1 gp 71b. Oil (flask) 1 sp
Bell 1 gp Paper (one sheet) 2 sp
Blanket 5 sp 31b. Parchment (one sheet) 1 sp
Block and tackle 1 gp 51b. Perfume (vial) 5 gp
Book 25 gp 51b. Piek,miner's 2 gp 101b.
Botlle, glass 2 gp 21b. Piton 5 cp 1/4Ib.
Bucket 5 cp 21b. Poison, basic (vial) 100 gp
Caltrops (bag of 20) 1 gp 21b. Pole (10-foot) 5 cp
Candle 1 cp Pot, iron 2 gp
Case, crossbow bolt 1 gp 1 Ib.Polion oJhealing 50 gp
Case, map or scroll 1 gp llb. Pouch 5 sp
Chain (10 feet) 5 gp 10 Ib. Quiver 1 gp
Chalk (l piece) 1 cp Ram, portable 4 gp
Chest 5 gp 251b. Rations (l day) 5 sp
Climber's kit 25 gp 121b. Robes 1 gp
Clothes, common 5 sp 31b. Rope, hempen (50 feet) 1 gp
Clothes, costume 5 gp 41b. Rope, silk (50 feet) 10 gp
Clothes, fine 15 gp 61b. Sack 1 cp
Clothes, traveler's 2 gp 41b. Scale, merchant's 5 gp
Component pouch 25 gp 21b. Sealing wax 5 sp
Crowbar 2 gp 51b. Shovel 2 gp
DruidicJocus Signal whistle 5 cp
Sprig of mistletoe 1 gp Signe! ring 5 gp
Totem 1 gp Soap 2 cp
Wooden staff 5 gp 41b. Spellbook 50 gp 31b.
Yew wand 10 gp 1 Ib. Spikes, iron (10) 1 gp 51b.
Fishing tackle 1 gp 41b. Spyglass 1,000 gp llb.
Flask or tankard 2 cp 1 Ib. Tent, two-person 2 gp 201b.
Grappling hook 2 gp 41b. Tinderbox 5 sp llb.
Hammer 1 gp 31b. Torch 1 cp llb.
2 gp 101b. Vial 1 gp
5 gp 31b. Waterskin 2 sp
Whetstone 1 cp
PARTIIEQUIPMENT
the alchemist's tire as an improvised weapon. On a
hit, the target takes Id4 tire damage at the start of
each of its turns. A creature can end this damage by
using its action to make a DC 10 Dexterity check to
extinguish the liames.
Antitoxin. A creature that drinks this viaI of liquid
gains advantage on saving throws against poison for I
hour. lt confers no benetit to undead or constructs.
Arcane Focus. An arcane focus is a special item-
an orb, a crystal, a rod, a specially constructed staff,
a wand.like length ofwood, or some similar item-
designed to channel the power of arcane spells. A
sorcerer, warlock, or wizard can use such an item as a
spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10.
Bal/ Bearings. As an action, you can spill these tiny
metal balls from their pouch to cover a levei area 10
feet square. A creature moving across the covered area
must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fali
prone. A creature moving through the area at half speed
doesn't need to make the saving throw.
Block and Tackle. A set of pulleys with a cable
threaded through them and a hook to attach to objects, a
block and tackle allows you to hoist up to four times the
weight you can normally lift.
Book. A book might contain poetry, historical
accounts, information pertaining to a particular tield
of lore, diagrams and notes on gnomish contraptions,
or just about anything else that can be represented
using text or pictures. A book of spells is a spellbook
(described later in this section).
Caltrops. As an action, you can spread a single bag
of caltrops to cover a 5-foot-square area. Any creature
that enters the area must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity
saving throw or stop moving and take I piercing
damage. Unti! the creature regains at least I hit point,
its walking speed is reduced by 10 feet. A creature
moving through the area at half speed doesn't need to
make the saving throw.
Candle. For I hour, a candle sheds bright light in a
5.foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet.
Case,Crossbow Bolt. This wooden case can hold up
to twenty crossbow bolts.
Case,Map orScrol/. This cylindricalleather case can
hold up to ten rolled-up sheets of paper or tive rolled-up
sheets of parchment.
Chain. A chain has 10 hit points. lt can be burst with a
successful DC 20 Strength check.
Climber's Kit. A climber's kit includes special pitons,
boot tips, gloves, and a harness. You can use the
climber's kit as an action to anchor yourself; when you
do, you can't fali more than 25 feet from the point where
you anchored yourself, and you can't climb more than 25
feet away from that point without undoing the anchor.
Component Pouch. A component pouch is a small,
watertight leather belt pouch that has compartments
to hold ali the material components and other special
items you need to cast your spells, except for those
components that have a specitic cost (as indicated in a
spell's description).
Crowbar. Using a crowbar granls advantage
to Strength checks where the crowbar's leverage
can be applied.Druidic Focus. A druidic focus might be a sprig of
mistletoe or holly, a wand or scepter made of yew or
another special wood, a staff drawn whole out of a living
tree, or a totem object incorporating feathers, fur, bones,
and teeth from sacred animaIs. A druid can use such an
object as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10.
Fishing Tackle. This kit includes a wooden rod, silken
line, corkwood bobbers, steel hooks, lead sinkers, velvet
lures, and narrow netting.
Healer's Kit. This kit is a leather pouch containing
bandages, salves, and splints. The kit has ten uses. As
an action, you can expend one use of the kit to stabilize
a creature that has Ohit points, without needing to make
a Wisdom (Medicine) check.
Holy Symbol. A holy symbol is a representation of
a god or pantheon. lt might be an amulet depicting a
symbol representing a deity, the same symbol carefully
engraved or inlaid as an emblem on a shield, or a tiny
box holding a fragment of a sacred relic. Appendix B
lists the symbols commonly associated with many gods
in the multiverse. A cleric or paladin can use a holy
symbol as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter
lO.To use the symbol in this way, the caster must hold it
in hand, wear it visibly,or bear it on a shield.
Holy Water. As an action, you can splash the contents
of this lIask onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw
it up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In either case,
make a ranged attack against a target creature, treating
the holy water as an improvised weapon. If the target is
a tiend or undead, it takes 2d6 radiant damage.
4 ,
EQUIPMENT PACKS
lhe starting equipmenl you gel fram your elass ineludes a
colleclion of useful advenluring gear, pullogelher in a pack.
lhe conlenls oflhese packs are Iisled here. Ifyou are buying
your slarling equipmenl, you can purchase a pack for lhe
price shown, which mighl be cheaper lhan buying lhe ilems
individually.
Surglar's Pack (16gp).Ineludes a backpack, a bag of 1,000
ball bearings, 10 feel of slring, a bell, 5 candles, a crowbar, a
hammer, 10 pilons, a hooded lanlern, 2 ftasks of oil, 5 days
ralions, a linderbox, and a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50
feel of hempen rope slrapped lo lhe side of it.
Diplomat's Pack (39 gp). Ineludes a chesl, 2 cases for maps
and scrolls, a seI offine elolhes, a bollle ofink, an ink pen,
a lamp, 2 flasks of oil, 5 sheels of paper, aviai of perfume,
sealing wax, and soap.
Dungeoneer's Pack (12gp).Ineludes a backpack, a crowbar,
a hammer, 10 pilons, 10 lorches, a linderbox, 10 days
of ralions, and a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50 feel of
hempen rope slrapped lo lhe side of il.
Entertainer's Pack (40gp).Ineludes a backpack, a bedrall,
2 coslumes, 5 candles, 5 days of ralions, a walerskin, and a
disguise kil.
Explorer's Pack (10 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bedrall,
a mess kil, a linderbox, 10 lorches, 10 days of ralions, and
a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50 feel ofhempen rape
slrapped lo lhe side of il.
Priest's Pack (19gp).Ineludes a backpack, a blankel, 10
candles, a linderbox, an alms box, 2 blocks ofincense, a
censer, veslmenls, 2 days of ralions, and a walerskin.
Scholar's Pack (40 gp). Includes a backpack, a book aflore,
a boltle ofink, an ink pen, 10 sheels ofparchmenl, a lillle
bag of sand, and a small knife.
~ ~
PART I EQUIP fENT
Acleric ar paladin maycreate holywater by
performing aspecial ritual. The ritual takes 1hour
toperform, uses 25 gpworth ofpowdered silver, and
requires the caster toexpend a 1st-leveispell slot.
Hunting Trap. When you use your action toset it,
this trap forms asaw-toothed steel ring that snaps shut
when acreature steps on apressure plate inthe center.
The trap isaffixed bya heavy chain toan immobi!e
object, such as atree ar aspike driven into the ground.
Acreature that steps on the plate must succeed ona DC
13Dexterity saving throw ar take Id4 piercing damage
and stop moving. Thereafter, unti! the creature breaks
free ofthe trap, its movement is limited bythe length
ofthe chain (typically 3feet long).Acreature can use
itsaction tomake aDC 135trength check, freeing
itself ar another creature within itsreach on asuccess.
Each fai!ed check deals 1piercing damage tothe
trapped creature.
Lamp.Alamp casts bright light ina 15-footradius
and dim light foran additional 30 feet. Once lit,ilburns
for6hours on aflask(1pint)ofoil.
Lantern, Bul/seye. Abullseye lantern casts bright
light ina60-foot cone and dim light foran additional 60
feet.Once lit,itburns for6hours onaflask (1pint)ofoil.
Lantern, Hooded. Ahooded lantern casts bright light
ina30-foot radius and dim light foran additional 30
feet. Once lit,itburns for6 hours on aflask (1pinl) of
oil.Asan action, you can lower the hood, reducing the
light lodim light ina5-foot radius.
Lock.Akeyisprovided with the lock. Without the
key,acreature proticient with thieves' toois can pick
this lockwith asuccessful DC 15Dexterity check.
Vour DMmay decide that better locks are available
for higher prices.
PART 1IEQUIPMENTMagnifying Glass. This lens allows acloser lookat
small objects. Itisalso useful as asubstitute forflint
and steel when starting tires. Lighting a/ire with a
magnifying glass requires light as bright as sunlight to
focus, tinder toignite, and about 5minutes forthe /ire
toignite. Amagnifying glass grants advantage on any
ability check made toappraise ar inspect an item that is
small ar highly detailed.
Manacles.These metal restraints can bind a5mall
ar Medium creature. Escaping the manacles requires
asuccessful DC20 Dexterity check. Breaking them
requires asuccessful DC20 5trength check. Each
set ofmanacles comes with one key.Without the key,
acreature pro/icient with thieves' tools can pick the
manacles' lockwith asuccessful DC 15Dexterity
check. Manacles have 15hitpoints.
Mess Kit.This tin boxcontains acup and simple
cutlery. The boxclamps together, and one side can
be used as acooking pan and the other as aplate ar
shallow bowl.
Oi/.Oi!usually comes inaclayflaskthat holds 1
pintoAsan action, you can splash the oi!inthis flask
anta acreature within 5feet ofyou ar throw itup to
20 feet,shattering iton impactoMake aranged attack
against atarget creature ar object, treating the oi!as
an improvised weapon. Onahit, the target iscovered
inoil. Ifthe larget takes any /ire damage before the oi!
dries (after 1minute), the target takes an additional 5
/ire damagc from the burning oil.Voucan also pour a
flask ofoi!on the ground tocover a5-foot-square area,
provided that the surface isleveI. Irlit.the oi!burns for
2rounds and deals 5tire damage toanycreature that
enters the area ar ends itsturn inthe area, Acreature
can take this damage onlyonce per turno
CONTAINER CAPACITY
)'CYoucan al50 strap items, such asa bedroll ar acoilaf rape,
to lhe oulside of a backpack.SpYI1/ass.Objeets viewed through aspyglass are
magnitied totwice their size.
Tent.Asimple and portable canvas shelter, a
tent sleeps two.
Tinderbox.This small container holds fiint,tire steel,
and tinder (usually dry c10thsoaked inIight oil)used lo
kindle atire. Using ittoIight atorch-or anything else
with abundant, exposed fuel-takes an action. Lighting
any olher tire takes 1minute.
Torch.Atorch burns for 1hour, providing bright Iight
ina20.foot radius and dim light foran additional 20
fee!. Ifyou make amelee attack with aburning torch
and hit, itdeals 1tire damage.Poison, Basic. Voucan use the poison inIhis viaI
lOcoat one slashing or piercing weapon or up tothree
pieces ofammunition. Applying the poison takes
an action. Acreature hitbythe poisoned weapon or
ammunition must make aDC 10Constitution saving
throw or take 1d4poison damage. Once applied, the
poison retains potency for I minute before drying.
Potion ofHeaJinl1. Acharacter who drinks the magical
red fiuidinthis vial regains 2d4 +2hit points. Drinking
or administering apotion takes an action.
Pouch.Ac10thor leather pouch can hold upto20
sling bullets or 50 blowgun needles, among other
things. Acompartmentalized pouch forholding spell
components iscalled acomponent pouch (described
earlier inthis section).
Quiver.Aquiver can hold up to20 arrows.
Ram, Portable. Voucan use aportable ram tobreak
down doors. When doing so,you gain a+4 bonus on the
Strength check. One other character can help you use
the ram, giving you advantage on this check.
Rations.Rations consist ofdry foods suitable
forextended travei, including jerky, dried fruit,
hardlack, and nuts.
Rope.Rope, whether made ofhemp orsilk, has 2hit
points and can beburst with a DC 17Strenglh check.
Sca/e, Merchant's. Ascale includes asmall balance,
pans, and asuitable assortment ofweights upto2
pounds. With it,youcan measure the exact weight of
small objects, such as raw precious metais or trade
goods, tohelp determine their worth.
SpeJlbook.Essential forwizards, aspellbook is
alealher.bound tome wilh 100 blank vellum pages
suitable forrecording spells.Container
Backpack*
Barrei
Basket
Bottle
Bucket
Chest
Flask ar lankard
Jug ar pilcher
PaI, iran
Pouch
Sack
Via I
WalerskinCapacily
1cubic f001/30 pounds of gear
40 gallons liquid, 4 cubic feel solid
2cubic feel/40 pounds of gear
1112pinls liquid
3gallons liquid, 1/2 cubic fool solid
12cubic feel/300 pounds of gear
1pinlliquid
1gallon liquid
1gallon liquid
1/5 cubic f001/6 pounds of gear
1cubic f001/30 pounds of gear
4ounces liquid
4 pinls liquid
PART I EQUII'MENT
153
TOOLS
Ato01helps you todo something youcouldn't otherwise
do,such as craft or repair an item, forgeadocument, or
pick alock. Yourrace, c1ass,background, or feats give
you proficiency with certa intools. Proficiency with ato01
allows you toadd your proficiency bonus toany ability
check you make using that tool.Too!use is not tied to
asingle ability, since proficiency with atool represents
broader knowledge ofitsuse. For example, the DM
might ask you tomake aDexterity check tocarve afine
detail with your woodcarver's tools, or aStrength check
tomake something out ofparticularly hard wood.
TOOlS
Item CostWeight
Arlisan's lools
Alchemist's supplies 50gp 81b.
Brewer's supplies 20gp 91b.
Calligrapher's supplies 10gp 51b.
Carpenter's tools 8gp 61b.
Cartographer's tools 15gp. 61b.
Cobbler's tools 5gp 51b.
Cook's utensils 1gp 81b.
Glassblower's tools 30gp 51b.
Jeweler's tools 25gp 21b.
Leatherworker's tools 5gp 51b.
Mason's tools 10gp 81b.
Painter's supplies 10gp 51b.
Potter's tools 10gp 31b.
Smith's tools 20gp 81b.
Tinker's tools 50gp 101b.
Weaver's tools 1gp 51b.
Woodcarver's tools 1gp 51b.
Disguise kit 25gp 31b.
Forgery kit 15gp 51b.
Gaming seI
Dice set 1sp
Dragonchess set 1gp 1/2Ib.
Playingcard set 5sp
Three-Dragon Ante set 1gp
Herbalism kit 5gp 31b.
Musical instrument
Bagpipes 30gp 61b.
Drum 6gp 31b.
Dulcimer 25gp 101b.
Flute 2gp 1Ib.
Lute 35gp 21b.
Lyre 30gp 21b.
Horn 3gp 21b.
Pan Rute 12gp 21b.
Shawm 2gp llb.
Viol 30gp llb.
Navigator's tools 25gp 21b.
Poisoner's kit 50gp 21b.
Thieves' tools 25gp 1Ib.
Vehicles (Iand ar water) " *
*See the "Mounts and Vehicles" section.
15+PART IIEQUIPMENTArtisan'sToo/s. These special tools inc1udethe items
needed topursue acraft or trade. The table shows
examples ofthe most common types oftools, each
providing items related toasingle craft. Proficiency
with aset ofartisan's tools lets you add your proficiency
bonus toany ability checks you make using the tools
inyour craft. Each type ofartisan's tools requires a
separate proficiency.
Disl1uise Kit. This pouch ofcosmetics, hair dye,and
small props letsyou create disguises that change your
physical appearance. Proficiency with this kit letsyou
add your proficiency bonus toanyability checks you
make tocreate avisual disguise.
Forl1ery Kit. This small boxcontains avariety of
papers and parchments, pens and inks, seals and
sealing wax, goldand silver leaf, and other supplies
necessary tocreate convincing forgeries ofphysica!
documents. Proficiency with this kit letsyou add your
proficiency bonus toany ability checks you make to
create aphysical forgery ofadocument.
Gaminl1 Set. This item encompasses awide range
ofgame pieces, inc1uding dice and decks ofcards (for
games such as Three-Dragon Ante).Afewcommon
examples appear on the Tools table, butother kinds of
gaming sets exist. Ifyou are proficient with agaming
set, you can addyour proficiency bonus toability checks
you make toplayagame with that set. Each type of
gaming set requires aseparate proficiency.
HerbaJism Kit. This kitcontains avariety of
instruments such as c1ippers, morta rand pestIe, and
pouches and vials used byherbalists tocreate remedies
and potions. Proficiency with this kit lets you add your
proficiency bonus toany ability checks you make to
identify or apply herbs. AIso,proficiency with this kitis
required tocreate antitoxin and polionsorhealinl1.
Musica/lnstrument. Several ofthe most common
types ofmusical instruments are shown on the table as
examples.Iryou have proficiency with agiven musical
instrument, you can addyour proficiency bonus to
any ability checks you make toplaymusic with the
instrumento Abard can use amusical instrument as a
spellcasting focus, as described inchapter 10.Each type
ofmusical instrument requires aseparate proficiency.
Navil1ator's Too/s. This set ofinstruments isused
fornavigation atsea. Proficiency with navigator's tools
letsyou chart aship's course and follownavigation
charts. In addition, these tools allow you toadd your
proficiency bonus toany ability check you make toavoid
getting lost atsea.
Poisoner's Kit. Apoisoner's kit inc1udes the vials,
chemicals, and other equipment necessary forthe
creation ofpoisons. Proficiency with this kit lets youadd
your proficiency bonus toany ability checks you make to
craft or use poisons.
Thieves'Too/s. This set oftools inc1udes asmall file,
aset oflock picks, asmall mirror mounted on ametal
handle, aset ofnarrow-bladed scissors, and apair of
pliers. Proficiency with these tools lets you add your
proficiency bonus toany ability checks you make to
disarm traps or open locks.
MOUNTS AND VEHICLES
Agoodmount can helpyoumovemore quickly through
thewilderness, butitsprimary purpose istocarry the
gear that would otherwise slowyoudown. The Mounts
and Other Animais table shows each animal's speed and
base carrying capacity.
Ananimal pulling acarriage, cart, chariot, sled,
orwagon can moveweight uptotivetimes itsbase
carrying capacity, inc1udingtheweight ofthevehic1e.
Ifmultiple animais pullthe same vehic1e,theycan add
their carrying capacity together.
Mounts other than those listed here are available in
theworlds of0&0, buttheyare rare and notnormally
available forpurchase. These inc1udeflyingmounts
(pegasi, griffons, hippogriffs, and similar animaIs) and
evenaquatic mounts (giant sea horses, forexample).
Acquiring such amount often means securing an egg
and raising thecreature yourself, making abargain with
apowerful entity,ornegotiating with the mount itself.
Barding.Barding isarmor designed toprotect an
animal's head, neck, chest, and body.Anytype of
armor shown ontheArmor table inthis chapter can
bepurchased asbarding. The cost isfourtimes the
equivalent armor made forhumanoids, and itweighs
twice asmuch.
SaddJes.Amilitary saddle braces the rider, helping
youkeepyour seat onanactive mount inbattle. 1t
givesyouadvantage onanycheckyoumake toremain
mounted. Anexoticsaddle isrequired forriding any
aquatic orflyingmount.
VehicJeProficiency. Ifyou have proticiency with a
certain kind ofvehic1e(land orwater),youcan addyour
proticiency bonus toanycheck youmake tocontrol that
kind ofvehic1eindifficultcircumstances.
Rowed Vesse1s. Keelboats and rowboats are used OH
lakes and rivers. Ifgoing downstream, add the speed of
the current (typically 3miles per hour) tothespeed of
55
TRADE GOODS lhe vehicle. These vehicles can'l be rowed againsl any
significanl currenl, bUllhey can be pulled upslream
by drafl animais on lhe shores. A rowboal weighs 100
pounds, in case advenlurers carry il over land.
MOUNTS ANO OTHER ANIMALS
Carrying
Ilem CosI Speed Capacily
Camel 50 gp 50 fI. 4801b.
Donkey or mule 8 gp 40 fI. 4201b.
Elephanl 200 gp 40 fI. 1,320Ib.
Horse, drafl 50 gp 40 ft. 5401b.
Horse, riding 75 gp 60 fI. 4801b.
Masliff 25 gp 40 fI. 1951b.
Pony 30 gp 40 ft. 2251b.
Warhorse 400 gp 60 fI. 5401b.CosI
1cp
2cp
5cp
1sp
5sp
1gp
2gp
3gp
5gp
10gp
15gp
50gp
500 gpGoods
1 ib. of wheat
1 ib. of fiour or one chicken
1 ib. of sall
1 Ib. ofiron or 1 sq. yd. of canvas
1 Ib. of copper or 1 sq. yd. of colton eloth
1 Ib. of ginger or one goat
1 Ib. of cinnamon or pepper, or one sheep
1 Ib. of c10ves or one pig
1 Ib. of silver or 1 sq. yd. oflinen
1 sq. yd. of silk or one eow
1 Ib. of saffron or one ox
1 Ib. of gold
1 Ib. of plalinum
LIFESTYLE EXPENSESEXPENSES
When not descending into lhe depths of the earth,
exploring ruins for lost treasures, or waging war againsl
the encroaching darkness, adventurers face more
mundane realities. Even in a fanlastical world, people
require basic necessilies such as shelter, sustenance,
and clothing. These things cost money, allhough some
lifestyles cosI more lhan others.
Lifeslyle expenses provide you with a simple way lo
accounl for the cost of living in a fantasy world. They
cover your accommodations, food and drink, and ali
your olher necessities. Furthermore, expenses cover the
cosi of maintaining your equipment so you can be ready
when advenlure nexl calls.
At lhe slart of each week or month (your choice),
choose a lifeslyle from the Expenses lable and pay the
price to sustain lhat lifeslyle. The prices lisled are per
day, so if you wish lo calculate the cosI of your chosen
lifestyle over a thirly-day period, multiply the listed price
by 30. Your lifestyle might change from one period lo
lhe next, based on lhe funds you have aI your disposal,
or you might maintain lhe same lifestyle throughout
your character's career.
Your Iifestyle choice can have consequences.
Mainlaining a weallhy lifestyle might help you make
contacts with the rich and powerful, though you run the
risk of altracting thieves. Likewise, living frugally might
help you avoid criminais, but you are unlikely lo make
powerful conneclions.
Price/Day
1sp
2sp
1gp
2gp
4gp
10 gp minimumLIFESTYLE EXPENSES
Lifeslyle
Wrelehed
Squalid
Poor
Modesl
Comforlable
Weallhy
AristocraticTACK, HARNESS, ANO DRAWN VEHICLES
Ilem CosI Weighl
Barding x4 x2
Bil and bridle 2 gp llb.
Carriage 100 gp 6001b.
Carl 15 gp 2001b.
Chariol 250 gp 1001b.
Feed (per day) 5 cp 101b.
$addle
Exolic 60 gp 401b.
Mililary 20 gp 301b.
Pack 5 gp 151b.
Riding 10 gp 251b.
Saddiebags 4 gp 81b.
Sled 20 gp 3001b.
Slabling (per day) 5sp
Wagon 35 gp 4001b.
WATERBORN EVEH ICLES
Ilem CosI Speed
Galley 30,000 gp 4 mph
Keelboal 3,000 gp 1 mph
Longship 10,000 gp 3 mph
Rowboal 50 gp llf2mph
Sailing ship 10,000 gp 2 mph
Warship 25,000 gp 2'12mph
TRADE GOODS
Mosl weallh is nol in coins. It is measured in liveslock,
grain, land, righlS lo collecllaxes, or righls lo resources
(such as a mine or a fores I).
Guilds, nobles, and royally regulale trade. Charlered
companies are granled righls to conducl trade along
certain routes, to send merchant ships to various ports,
or to buy or sell specific goods. Guilds set prices for
lhe goods or services lhat lhey conlrol, and determine
who may or may nol offer lhose goods and services.
Merchanls commonly exchange trade goods without
using currency. The Trade Goods table shows the value
of commonly exchanged goods.
PART1 EQUIP lENT
157
FOOD, DRINK, AND LODGING
The Food, Drink, and Lodging table gives prices for
individual food items and asingle night's lodging. These
prices are included inyour totallifestyle expenses.ComfortabJe. Choosing acomfortable lifestyle
means that youcan afford nicer clothing and can easily
maintain your equipment. Vouliveinasmall cottage
inamiddle-class neighborhood or inaprivate room
at afineinn. Vouassociate with merchants, skilled
tradespeople, and military officers.
Wea1thy.Choosing awealthy lifestyle means living a
lifeof!uxury, though you might not have achieved the
social status associated with the oldmoney ofnobility
or royalty. Voulivealifestyle comparable tothat ofa
highly successful merchant, afavored servant ofthe
royalty, or the owner ofafewsmall businesses. Vou
have respectable lodgings, usually aspacious home in
agood part oftown or acomfortable suite atafineinn.
Voulikely have asmall staff ofservants.
Aristoeratie. Voulivealifeofplenty and comfort. Vou
move incircles populated bythe most powerful people
inthe community. Vouhave excellent lodgings, perhaps
atownhouse inthe nicest part oftown or rooms inthe
finest inn. Voudine atthe best restaurants, retain the
most skilled and fashionable tailor, and have servants
attending toyour every need. Voureceive invitations
tothe social gatherings ofthe rich and powerful, and
spend evenings inthe company ofpoliticians, guild
leaders, high priests, and nobility. Voumust also
contend with the highest leveIsofdeceit and treachery.
The wealthier you are, the greater the chance you will
bedrawn into political intrigue as apawn or participant.Wretehed.Vouliveininhumane conditions. With
no place tocall home, you shelter wherever you can,
sneaking into barns, huddling inoldcrates, and relying
on the goad graces ofpeople better offthan you.A
wretched lifestyle presents abundant dangers. Violence,
disease, and hunger followyou wherever you go.Other
wretched people cavetyour armor, weapons, and
adventuring gear, which represent afortune bytheir
standards. Vouare beneath the notice ofmost people.
SquaJid.Vouliveinaleaky stable, amud-floored hut
just outside town, or avermin-infested boarding house
inthe worst part oftown. Vouhave shelter from the
elements, butyou liveinadesperate and often vialent
environment, inplaces rife with disease, hunger, and
misfortune. Vouare beneath the notice ofmost people,
and you have fewlegal protections. Most people at
this lifestyle leveihave suffered some terrible setback.
They might be disturbed, marked as exiles, or suffer
from disease.
Poor.Apoor lifestyle means going without the
comforts available inastable community. Simple food
and lodgings, threadbare clothing, and unpredictable
conditions result inasufficient, though probably
unpleasant, experience. Vouraccommodations might
bearoom inaflophouse or inthe common room above
atavern. Voubenefit from some legal protections,
butyou still have tocontend with violence, crime,
and disease. People atthis lifestyle leveitend tobe
unskilled laborers, costermongers, peddlers, thieves,
mercenaries, and other disreputable types.
Modest.Amodest lifestyle keeps you out ofthe slums
and ensures that you can maintain your equipment.
Vouliveinan 01der part oftown, renting aroom ina
boarding house, inn, or temple. Voudon't gohungry or
thirsty, and your living conditions are clean, ifsimple.
Ordinary people living modest lifestyles include soldiers
with families, laborers, students, priests, hedge wizards,
and the like.
PART11 EQUIPMENTFooo,DRINK, ANO LOOGING
Item
Ale
Callon
Mug
Banquet (per person)
Bread, loaf
Cheese, hunk
Inn stay (per day)
Squalid
Poor
Modest
Comfortable
Wealthy
Aristocratic
Meals (per day)
Squalid
Poor
Modest
Comfortable
Wealthy
Aristocratic
Meat, chunk
Wine
Common (pitcher)
Fine (bottle)Cost
2sp
4cp
10gp
2cp
1sp
7cp
1sp
5sp
8sp
2gp
4gp
3cp
6cp
3sp
5sp
8sp
2gp
3sp
2sp
10gp
Skilled hirelings include anyone hired lo perform a
service that involves a proficiency (including weapon,
tool, or skill): a mercenary, artisan, scribe, and so on.
The pay shown is a minimum; some expert hirelings
require more pay. Untrained hirelings are hired for
menial work that requires no particular skill and can
include laborers, porters, maids, and similar workers.
SPELLCASTING SERVICES
When you make your character, you can roll once on
lhe Trinkets table to gain a trinket, a simple item lightly
touched by mystery. The DM might also use this table.
It can help stock a room in a dungeon or fiHa creature's
pockets.People who are able to cast spells don't fali into the
category of ordinary hirelings. lt might be possible to
find someone willing to cast a spell in exchange for coin
or favors, but it is rarely easy and no established pay
rates exisl. As a rule, the higher the leveI of the desired
spell, the harder it is to find someone who can cast il
and the more it costs.
Hiring someone to cast a relatively common spell
of 1st or 2nd levei, such as cure wounds oridentify, is
easy enough in a city or town, and might cost 10 to 50
gold pieces (plus the cost of any expensive material
components). Finding someone able and wiHing to
cast a higher-Ievel spell might involve traveling to a
large city, perhaps one with a university or prominent
temple. Once found, lhe spellcaster might ask for a
service instead of payment-the kind of service that
only adventurers can provide, such as retrieving arare
item from a dangerous locale or traversing a monster-
infested wilderness to deliver somelhing important to
a distant settlemenl.
TRINKETS••
••
Pay
2 gp per day
2 sp per day
2 cp per mile
1cp
1 sp per mile3 cp per mile
1cpService
Coach cah
Belween lowns
Wilhin a eily
Hireling
Skilled
Untrained
Messenger
Road or gate 1011
Ship's passageSELF-SUFFICIENCY
lhe expenses and lifeslyles deseribed in lhis ehapler assume
lhal you are spending your lime between advenlures in lown,
availing yourself of whalever serviees you ean afford-paying
for food and sheller, paying lownspeople lo sharpen your
sword and repair your armor, and so on. Some eharaelers,
lhough, mighl prefer lo spend lheir lime away from
eivilizalion, suslaining lhemselves in lhe wild by hunling,
foraging, and repairing lheir own gear.
Mainlaining lhis kind oflifeslyle doesn'l require you lO
spend any eoin, bul il is lime.eonsuming. If you spend
your lime between advenlures praelieing a profession, as
deseribed in ehapler 8, you ean eke oul the equivalent of a
poor Iifestyle. Profieieney in the Survival skilllets you live aI
the equivalent of a eomforlable lifestyle .••••
SERVICESSERVICES
Advenlurers can pay nonplayer characters to assist them
or act on their behalf in a variety of circumstances. Most
such hirelings have fairly ordinary skills, while others
are masters of a craft or art, and a few are experts with
specialized adventuring skills.
Some of the most basic types of hirelings appear on
the Services table. Other common hirelings include
any of the wide variety of people who inhabit a typical
town or city, when the adventurers pay them to
perform a specific task. For example, a wizard might
paya carpenter to conslruct an elaborale chest (and
ils miniature replica) for use in the Leomund's secret
chest spell. A fighter might commission a blacksmilh to
forge a special sword. A bard mighl pay a tailor lo make
exquisite clothing for an upcoming performance in
front of the duke.
Olher hirelings provide more expert or dangerous
services. Mercenary soldiers paid to help the
advenlurers take on a hobgoblin army are hirelings, as
are sages hired to research ancient or esoleric lore. If a
high-Ievel adventurer establishes a stronghold of some
kind, he or she might hire a whole staff of servants and
agents to run the place, from a castellan or steward
to meniallaborers lo keep the stables clean. These
hirelings often enjoy a long-term contract that includes
a place to live within lhe stronghold as part of the
offered compensation.
PARTI EQUIPMENT59
TRINKETS d100Trinkel
d100Trinkel 27A shard of obsidian that always feels warm to the
01A mummified goblin hand touch
02A piece of crystal that faintly glows in the moonlight 28A dragon's bony talon hanging from a plain leather
03A gold coin minted in an unknown land necklace
04A diary written in a language you don't know 29A pair of old socks
05A brass ring that never tarnishes 30A blank book whose pages refuse to hold ink, chalk,
06An old chess piece made from glass graphite, or any olher substance or marking
07A pair ofknucklebone dice, each with a skull symbol 31A silver badge in the shape of a five-pointed star
on the side thal would normally show six pips 32A knife lhat belonged to a relative
08A small idol depicting a nightmarish creature that 33A glass viaIfilled with nail c1ippings
gives you unsettling dreams when you sleep near it 34A rectangular metal device with two tiny metal cups
09A rope necklace from which dangles four mummified on one end that throws sparks when wet
elf fingers 35A white, sequined glove sized for a human
10The deed for a parcel ofland in a realm unknown 36A vest with one hundred liny pockets
to you 37A small, weightless stone block
11A l-ounce block made from an unknown material 38A tiny sketch portrait of a goblin
12A small c10th doll skewered with needles 39An empty glass vial that smells of perfume when
13A tooth from an unknown beast opened
14An enormous scale, perhaps from a dragon 40A gemstone that looks like a lump of coai when
15A bright green feather examined by anyone but you
16An old divination card bearing your likeness 41A scrap of c10th from an old banner
17A glass orb filled with moving smoke 42A rank insignia from a lost legionnaire
18A 1-pound egg wilh a bright red shell 43A tiny silver bell without a c1apper
19A pipe that blows bubbles 44A mechanical canary inside a gnomish lamp
20A glass jar containing a weird bit of fiesh fioating in 45A tiny chest carved to look like it has numerous feet
pickling fiuid on the bottom
21A tiny gnome-crafted music box that plays a song 46A dead sprite inside a clear glass bottle
you dimly remember from your childhood 47A metal can that has no opening but sounds as if it
22A small wooden statuette of a smug halfiing is filled with liquid, sand, spiders, or broken glass
23A brass orb etched with strange runes (your choice)
24 A multicolored stone disk 48 A glass orb filled with water, in which swims a
25A tiny silver icon of a raven c1ockwork goldfish
26A bag containing forty-seven humanoid teeth, one 49 A silver spoon with an M engraved on the handle
of which is rotten 50A whistle made from gold-colored wood
160PARTIIEQUIPMENT
dlOOTrinkel dlOOTrinkel
51 A dead scarab beelle lhe size of your hand 79An invilalion lO a parly where a murder happened
52 Two loy soldiers, one wilh a missing head 80A bronze penlaele wilh an elching of a ral's head
53 A small box filled wilh differenl.sized bultons in its center
54A candle lhal can'l be lil 81A purple handkerchief embroidered with lhe name of
55 A liny cage wilh no door a powerful archmage
56 An old key 82Half of a floorplan for a lemple, caslle, or some olher
57 An indecipherable lreasure map structure
58 A hill from a broken sword 83A bil of folded clolh lhal, when unfolded, lurns inlo
59 A rabbil's fool a slylish cap
60 A glass eye 84A receipl of deposil aI a bank in a far.flung cily
61A cameo carved in the likeness of a hideous person 85A diary wilh seven missing pages
62 A silver skulllhe size of a coin 86 An empty silver snuffbox bearing an inscription on
63 An alabaster mask lhe surface lhal says "dreams"
64 A pyramid of Slicky black incense thal smells very bad 87An iron holy symbol devoled lo an unknown god
65 A nighlcap lhal, when worn, gives you pleasanl 88 A book lhallells lhe slory of a legendary hero's rise
dreams and fali, wilh lhe lasl chapler missing
66 A single callrop made from bone 89 Aviai of dragon blood
67A gold monoele frame wilhoullhe lens 90 An ancienl arrow of elven design
68 A 1.inch cube, each side painled a differenl color 91 A needle lhal never bends
69 A cryslal knob from a door 92An ornale brooch of dwarven design
70A small packel filled wilh pink dusl 93An emply wine bollle bearing a prelty labellhal says,
71A fragmenl of a beauliful song, wrilten as musical "The Wizard ofWines Winery, Red Dragon Crush,
noles on lwo pieces of parchmenl 331422.W"
72A silver leardrop earring made from a realleardrop 94A mosaic lile wilh a mullicolored, glazed surface
73The shell of an egg painted wilh scenes of human 95A pelrified mouse
misery in dislurbing delail 96 A black pirale flag adorned wilh a dragon's skull
74A fan lhal, when unfolded, shows a sleeping cal and crossbones
75A seI of bone pipes 97 A liny mechanical crab or spider lhal moves aboul
76A four.leaf elover pressed inside a book discussing when it's not being observed
manners and eliquelle 98 A glass jar conlaining lard wilh a labellhal reads,
77A sheel of parchmenl upon which is drawn a complex "Griffon Grease"
mechanical conlraplion 99 Awooden box wilh a ceramic boltom lhal holds a
78 An ornale scabbard lhal fils no blade you have living worm wilh a head on each end of ils body
found so far 100A melai um conlaining lhe ashes of a hero
PART 1 EQUIPME T 161
CHAPTER 6:CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS
MULTICLASSINGAbility Score Minimum
Strength 13
(harisma 13
Wisdom 13
Wisdom 13
Strength 13 ar Dexterity 13
Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13
Strength 13 and (harisma 13
Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13
Dexterity 13
(harisma 13
(harisma 13
Intelligence 13Class
Barbarian
Bard
Cleric
Druid
Fighter
Monk
Paladin
Ranger
Rogue
Sorcerer
Warlock
WizardPREREQ_U_IS_I_T_E_S _
To qualify for a new c1ass,you must meet the ability score
prerequisites for both your current c1ass and your new
one, as shown in the Multiclassing Prerequisites tabJe.
For example, a barbarian who decides to multiclass into
the druid c1ass must have both Strength and Wisdom
scores of 13 or higher. Without the full training that
a beginning character receives, you must be a quick
study in your new c1ass, having a natural aptitude that
is reAected by higher-than-average ability scores.
MULTlCLASSING PREREQUISITES
PROFICIENCY BONUSEXPERIENCE POINTS
HIT POINTS AND HIT DICE
Vou gain the hit points from your new c1ass as described
for leveis after 1st. You gain the 1st-leveI hit points for a
c1ass only when you are a 1st-levei character.
Vouadd together the Hit Dice granted by ali your
classes to form your pool of Hit Dice. If the Hit Dice are
the same die type, you can simply pool them together.
For example, both the fighter and the paladin have a
dlO. so ifyou are a palndin 5/fighter 5, you have ten dlO
Hit Dice. Ifyour classes give you Hit Dice of different
types, keep track of them separate!y. Ifyou are a paladin
5jcleric 5, for example, you have fivedlO Hit Dice and
fived8 Hit Dice.The experience point cost to gain a levei is always
based on your total character leve!. as shown in the
Character Advancement table in chapter 1,not your levei
in a particular c1ass. So, ifyou are a c1eric 6jfighter 1,
you must gain enough XP to reach 8th levei before you
can take your second levei as a fighter or your seventh
levei as a c1eric.
•• ••HE COMBINATION Of ABILITY SCORES, RACE,
class, and background defines your
character's capabilities in the game, and
the personal details you create set your
character apart from every other character.
Even within your class and race, you have
options to fine-tune what your character
can do. But this chapter is for players who-with the
DM's permission-want to go a step further.
This chapter defines two optional sets of rules for
customizing your character: multiclassing and feats.
Multiclassing lets you combine classes together,
and feats are special options you can choose instead
of increasing your ability scores as you gain leveis.
Your DM decides whether these options are available
in a campaign.
Multiclassing allows you to gain leveis in multipie
classes. Doing so lets you mix the abilities of those
classes to realize a character concept that might not be
reAected in one of the standard class options.
With this role, you have the option of gaining a levei
in a new class whenever you advance in levei, instead
of gaining a leveI in your current class. Your leveis in
ali your classes are added together to determine your
character leveI. For example, ifyou have three leveIs in
wizard and two in fighter, you're a 5th-levei character.
As you advance in leveis, you might primarily remain
a member ofyour original class with just a few leveis
in another class, or you might change course entire!y,
never looking back at the c1ass you left behind. Vou
might even start progressing in a third or fourth c1ass.
Compared to a single-c1ass character of the same levei,
you'lI sacrifice some focus in exchange for versatility.
4 •
MULTICLASStNG EXAMPLE
Gary is playing a 4th-levei fighter. When his character earns
enough experience points to reach Sth levei, Gary decides
that his character will multielass instead of continuing to
progress as a fighter. Gary's fighter has been spending a lot
of time with Dave's rogue, and has even been doing some
jobs on the side for the local thieves' guild as a bruiser. Gary
decides that his character will multielass into the rogue e1ass,
and thus his character becomes a 4th.level fighter and lst-
levei rogue (written as fighter 4/rogue 1).
When Gary's character earns enough experience to
reach 6th levei, he can decide whether to add another
fighter levei (becoming a fighter S/rogue 1), another rogue
levei (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 2), ar a levei in a third
e1ass, perhaps dabbling in wizardry thanks to the tome of
mysterious lore he acquired (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 1/
wizard 1).
Vour proficiency bonus is always based on your total
character levei, as shown in the Character Advancement
table in chapter 1,not your levei in a particular class.
For example, ifyou are a fighter 3/rogue 2, YOllhave the
proficiency bonlls of a 5th-levei character, which is +3.
PART 1 I CUSTo~nZATION OPTIONS
MUlTICLASSING PROFICIENCIESPROFICIENCIES
CLASS FEATURESWhen you gain a levei in a class other than your first,
you gain only some ofthat class's starting proficiencies,
as shown in the Multiclassing Proficiencies table.UNARMORED DEFENSE
]fyou already have the Unarmored Defense feature, you
can't gain itagain from another class.
SPELLCASTING
Your capacity for spellcasting depends partly on your
combined leveis in ali your spellcasting classes and
partly on your individual leveis in those classes. Once
you have the Spellcasting feature from more than one
class, use the rules below. Ifyou multiclass but have the
Spellcasting feature from only one class, you follow the
rules as described in that class.
SpeJls Known and Prepared. Voudetermine
what spells you know and can prepare for each class
individually, as ifyou were a single.classed member of
that class. ]fyou are a ranger 4/wizard 3, for example,
you know three Ist.level ranger spells based on your
leveis in the ranger class. As 3rd-Ievel wizard, you know
three wizard cantrips, and your spellbook contains ten
wizard spells, two ofwhich (the two you gained when
you reached 3rd levei as a wizard) can be 2nd-levei
spells. Ifyour Intelligence is 16,you can prepare six
wizard spells from your spellbook.
Each spell you know and prepare isassociated with one
ofyour classes, and you use the spellcasting ability ofthat
class when you cast the spell. Similarly, a spellcasting
focus, such as a holysymbol, can be used only forthe
spells from the class associated with that focus.
SpeJl Slots. Voudetermine your available spell slots
byadding together ali your leveIs in the bard, cleric,
druid, sorcerer, and wizard classes, half your leveis
(raunded down) in the paladin and ranger classes, and
a third ofyour fighter or rogue leveis (rounded down)
ifyou have the Eldritch Knight or the Arcane Trickster
feature. Use this total to determine your spell slots by
consulting the Multiclass Spellcaster table.
Ifyou have more than one spellcasting class, this table
might giveyou spell slots ofa levei that is higher than
the spells you know or can prepare. Voucan use those
slots, but only to cast your lower.level spells. Ifa lower-
levei spell that you cast, like burning bands, has an
enhanced effect when cast using a higher.level slot, you
can use the enhanced effect, even though you don't have
any spells ofthat higher leveI.
For example, ifyou are the aforementioned ranger 4/
wizard 3,you count as a 5th-levei character when
determining your spell slots: you have four Ist.level
slots, three 2nd.level slots, and two 3rd.level slots.
However, you don't know any 3rd.level spells, nor do you
know any 2nd-levei ranger spells. Voucan use the spell
slots ofthose leveis to cast the spells you do know-and
potentially enhance their effects.
Pact Magie. Ifyou have both the Spellcasting class
feature and the Pact Magic class feature from the warlock
class, you can use the spell slots you gain from the Pact
Magic feature to cast spells you know or have prepareu
from classes with the Spellcasting class feature, and you
can use the spell slots you gain fram the Spellcasting
class feature to cast warlock spells you know.Light armar, simple weaponsProficiencies Gained
Shields, simple weapons, martial weapons
Light armar, one skill ofyour ehoiee, one
musical instrument afyourchoice
Light armar, medium armar, shields
Light armar, medium armar, shields (druids
will not wear armar ar use shields made of
metal)
Light armar, medium armar, shields, simple
weapons, martial weapons
Simple weapons, shortswords
Light armar, medium armar, shields, sim pie
weapons, martial weapons
Light armar, medium armar, shields, simple
weapons, martial weapons, one skill from the
elass's skill list
Light armar, one skill from the c1ass's skill list,
thieves' toolsRanger
RogueMonk
PaladinFighter
Sorcerer
Warloek
WizardClass
Barbarian
Bard
Clerie
Druid
When you gain a new leveIin a class, you get its features
for that leveI.Afew features, however, have additional
rules when you're multiclassing: Channel Divinity, Extra
Attack, Unarmored Defense, and Spellcasting.
CHANNEL DIVINITY
Ifyou already have the Channel Divinity feature and gain
a leveIin a class that also grants the feature, you gain the
Channel Divinity effects granted bythat class, but getting
the feature again doesn't giveyou an additional use of
it.Yougain additional uses only when you reach a class
levei that explicitly grants them toyou. For example, if
you are a cleric 6/paladin 4,you can use Channel Divinity
twice between rests because you are high enough levei
in the cleric class to have more uses. Whenever you use
the feature, you can choose any ofthe Channel Divinity
effects available toyou from your two classes.
EXTRA ATTACK
Ifyou gain the Extra Attack class feature from more
than one class, the features don't add together. Vou
can't make more than two attacks with this feature
unless ilsays you do (as lhe fighter's version of Extra
Attack does). Similarly, the warlock's eldritch invocation
Thirsting Blade doesn't giveyou additional attacks ifyou
also have Extra Attack.
PART I ICUSTOMIZATlON OPTIONS
MULTICLASS SPELLCASTER:
SPELL SLOTS PER SPELL LEVEL
LvI.1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th
1st 2
2nd 3
3rd 4 2
4th 4 3
5th 4 3 2
6th 433
7th 4 3 3 1
8th 4 3 3 2
9th 4 3 3 31
10th 4 33 3 2
11th 4 3 3 3 21
12th 433 3 2 1
13th 4 3 3 3 21 1
14th 4 3 3 32 1 1
15th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
16th 4 3 3 3 2 1 1
17th 43 3 32 1 1
18th 4 3 3 3 3 11
19th 4 33 3 3 2 1
20th 43 3 3 3 22
FEATS
Afeat represents a talent or an area ofexpertise that gives
a character special capabilities. lt embodies training,
experience, and abitities beyond what a c1ass provides.
At certain leveIs, your c1ass gives you the Ability Score
Improvement feature. Using the optional feats rule, you
can forgo taking that feature to take a feat ofyour choice
instead. Voucan take each feat only once, unless the
feat's description says otherwise.
Voumust meet any prerequisite specified in a feat
to take that feat. Ifyou ever lose a feat's prerequisite,
you can't use lhat feat until you regain the prerequisite.
For example, the Grappler feat requires you to have a
Strength of 13 or higher. Ifyour Strength is reduced
below 13 somehow-perhaps by a withering curse-
you can't benefit from the Grappler feat until your
Strength is restored.
ALERT
Always on the lookout for danger, you gain the
following benefits:
Vougain a +5 bonus to initiative.
Voucan't be surprised while you are conscious.
Other creatures don't gain advantage on attack rolls
against you as a result ofbeing hidden from you.
ATHLETE
Vouhave undergone extensive physical training to gain
the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1,to a
maximum of 20.
When you are prone, standing up uses only 5 feet of
your movement.Climbing doesn't halve your speed.
Voucan make a running long jump or a running high
jump after moving only 5 feet on foot, rather than
10 feet.
ACTOR
Skilled at mimicry and dramatics, you gain the
following benefits:
Increase your Charisma score by 1,to a maximum of20.
Vouhave advantage on Charisma (Deception) and
Charisma (Performance) checks when trying to pass
yourself offas a different person.
Voucan mimic the speech ofanother person or the
sounds made by other creatures. Voumust have
heard the person speaking. or heard the creature
make the sound, for at least 1minute. Asuccessful
Wisdom (Insight) check contested byyour Charisma
(Deception) check allows a tistener to determine that
the effect is faked.
CHARGER
When you use your action to Dash, you can use a
bonus action to make one melee weapon attack or to
shove a creature.
1fyou move at least 10 feet in a straight tine
immediately before taking this bonus action, you either
gain a +5 bonus to the attack's damage roll (ifyou chose
to make a melee attack and hit) or push the target up
to 10 feet away from you (ifyou chose to shove and
you succeed).
CROSSBOW EXPERT
Thanks to extensive practice with the crossbow, you
gain the following benefits:
Vouignore the loading quality ofcrossbows with
which you are proficient.
Being within 5 feet of a hostile creature doesn't
impose disadvantage on your ranged attack rolls.
When you use the Attack action and attack with a one-
handed weapon, you can use a bonus action to attack
with a loaded hand crossbow you are holding.
DEFENSIVE DUELIST
Prerequisite: Dexterity 13or higher
When you are wielding a finesse weapon with which
you are proficient and another creature hits you with
a melee attack, you can use your reaction to add your
proficiency bonus to your ACfor that attack, potentially
causing the attack to miss you.
DUAL WIELDER
Voumaster fighting with two weapons, gaining the
following benefits:
Vougain a +1 bonus to ACwhile you are wielding a
separate melee weapon in each hand.
Voucan use two-weapon fighting even whcn the one-
handed melee weapons you are wielding aren't light.
Voucan draw or stow two one-handed weapons when
you would normally be able to draw or stow only one.
PART I I CUSTOMIZATIO. OPTIO S
,66DUNGEON DELVER
Alert tothe hidden traps and secret doors found inmany
dungeons, you gain the following benefits:
Vouhave advantage onWisdom (Perception) and
Intelligence (Investigation) checks made todetect the
presence ofsecret doors,
Vouhave advantage onsaving throws made toavoid
or resist traps.
Vouhave resistance tothe damage dealt bytraps.
Voucan search fortraps while traveling atanormal
pace, instead ofonlyat aslow pace.
DURABLE
Hardy and resilient, you gain the following benefits:
lncrease your Constitution score by I, toa
maximum of20.
PART I ICUSTOMIZATION OPTIONSWhen you roll aHit Dietoregain hitpoints, the
minimum number ofhitpoints you regain from
the rollequals twice your Constitution modifier
(minimum of2).
ELEMENTAL ADEPT
Prerequisite: The ability tocast at least one spell
When you gain this feat, choose one ofthe following
damage types: acid, cold, fire,lightning, or thunder.
Spells you cast ignore resistance todamage ofthe
chosen type. Inaddition, when you rolldamage fora
spell you cast that deals damage ofthat type, you can
treat any I on adamage die as a2.
Voucan select this feat multipIetimes. Each time
you doso,you must choose adifferent damage type.
GRAPPLER
Prerequisite: Strength 13arhigher
You'vedeveloped the skills necessary toholdyour
own inclose-quarters grappling. Vougain the
following benefits:
Vouhave advantage on attack rolls against acreature
you are grappling.
Voucan use your action totrytopin acreature grap-
pled byyou. Todoso, make another grapple check. lf
you succeed, you and the creature are both restrained
until the grapple ends.
Creatures that are one size larger than you don't auto-
matically succeed on checks toescape your grapple.
GREAT WEAPON MASTER
You'velearned toput the weight ofaweapon toyour
advantage, letting its momentum empower your strikes.
Vougain the following benefits:
Onyour turn, when you score acriticai hitwith a
meleeweapon or reduce acreature to Ohit points
with one, you can make one melee weapon attack as a
bonus action.
Before you make amelee attack with aheavy weapon
that you are proficient with, you can choose totake a
-5penalty tothe attack roll. Ifthe attack hits, you add
+10tothe attack's damage.
HEALER
Vouare an able physician, allowing you tomend wounds
quickly and getyour allies back inthe fight.Vougain the
following benefits:
When you use ahealer's kit tostabilize adying crea-
ture, that creature also regains 1hit point.
Asan action. you can spend one use ofahealer's kitto
tend toacreature and restore 1d6 +4hit points toit,
plus additional hitpoints equal tothe creature's Illax-
illlurn nurnber ofHitDice. The creature can't regain
hit points frolll this feat again until itfinishes ashort
ar longrest.
HEAVILY ARMORED
Prerequisite: Proliciency with mediuJ1Jarmor
Vouhave trained toIllaster the use ofheavy armor,
gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength score by1,toarnaximum of20.
• Yougain proficiency with heavy armor.
HEAVY ARMOR MASTER
Prerequisite: Proliciency with heavy armor
Voucan use your armor todeflect strikes that would kill
others. Vougain the following benefits:
Increase your Strength score by1,toaIllaximum of20.
While you are wearing heavy armor, bludgeoning.
piercing, and slashing damage that you take from non-
magical weapons isreduced by3.INSPIRING LEADER
Prerequisite: Charisma 13orhigher
Voucan spend 10minutes inspiring your companions,
shoring up their resolve tofight.When you do so, choose
up tosix friendly creatures (which can include yourself)
within 30 feet ofyouwho can see or hear you and who
can understand you. Each creature can gain temporary
hit points equal toyour levei +your Charisma modifier.
Acreature can't gain temporary hit points from this feat
again until ithas finished ashort or long rest.
KEEN MIND
Vouhave amind that can track time, direction,
and detail with uncanny precision. Vougain the
following benefits.
1ncrease your lntelligence score by1,toarnaximum
of20.
Voualways know which wayis north.
Voualways know the number ofhours lef!before the
next sunrise ar sunset.
Voucan accurately recall anything you have seen or
heard within the past month.
LIGHTLY ARMORED
Vouhave trained tomaster the use oflight armor,
gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1,toa
maximum of20.
Vougain proficiency with light armor.
LINGUIST
Vouhave studied languages and codes, gaining the
following benefits:
Increase your Intelligencescore by1,toamaximum of20.
Voulearn three languages ofyour choice.
Voucan ablycreate written ciphers. Others can't deci-
pher acode you create unless you teach them, they
succeed on an Intelligence check (DCequal toyour
1ntelligence score +your proficiency bonus), OI'they
use magic todecipher it.
LUCKY
Vouhave inexplicable luck that seems tokick inatjust
the right moment.
Vouhave 3luck points. Whenever you rnake an attack
roll,an ability check. ar asaving throw, you can spend
one luckpoint torollan additional d20. Voucan choose
tospend one ofyour luck points after you roll the die,
but before the outcome isdetermined. Vouchoose which
ofthe d20s isused forthe attack roll, ability check, or
saving throw.
Voucan also spend one luck point when an attack
roll ismade against you. RolIad20, and then choose
whether the attack uses the attacker's rulloryours.
Ifmore than one creature spends a luckpoint to
influence the outcome ofaroll,lhe points cancel each
other oul; noadditional dice are rolled.
Vouregain your expended luck points when you
finish along rest.
PART 1ICUSTOM IZA I ION OP1IONS
[68MAGE SLAYER
Vouhavepracticed techniques useful inmelee combat
against spellcasters, gaining the following benefits:
When acreature within 5feetofyoucasts aspell,you
can useyour reaction tomake amelee weapon attack
against that creature.
When youdamage acreature that isconcentrating on
aspell, that creature has disadvantage onthe saving
throw itmakes tomaintain itsconcentration.
Vouhaveadvantage onsaving throws against spells
cast bycreatures within 5feetofyou.
MAGIC INITIATE
Choose ac1ass:bard, c1eric,druid, sorcerer, warlock, or
wizard. Voulearn twocantrips ofyour choice fromthat
c1ass'sspelllisl.
Inaddition, choose one 1st-leveispell fromthat same
lisl.Voulearn that spell and can cast itatitslowest
leveI.Onceyoucast it,youmust finishalongrest before
youcan cast itagain.
Yourspellcasting abilityforthese spells depends
onthe c1assyouchose: Charisma forbard,
sorcerer, orwarlock: Wisdom forc1ericordruid: or
Intelligence forwizard.
MARTIAL ADEPT
Vouhave martial training that allows youto
perform special combat maneuvers. Vougain the
following benefits:
Voulearn twomaneuvers ofyour choice fromamong
those available tothe Battle Master archetype inthe
fighter c1ass.Iramaneuver youuse requires your tar-
gettomake asaving throw toresist the maneuver's
effects, the saving throw DCequals 8 +your profi-
ciency bonus +your Strength orDexterity modifier
(your choice).
lfyou already havesuperiority dice,yougain one
more: otherwise, youhaveone superiority die,which
isad6.This dieisused tofuelyour maneuvers. A
superiority die isexpended when youuse il.Vou
regain your expended superiority dice when you
finish ashort orlongresl.
MEDIUM ARMOR MASTER
Prerequisite: Proficiency with medium armor
Vouhave practiced moving inmedium armor togain the
followingbenefits:
Wearing medium armor doesn't impose disadvantage
onyour Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
When youwear medium armor, youcan add 3,
rather than 2,toyourACifyouhaveaDexterity of
16orhigher.
MOBILE
Vouare exceptionally speedy and agile. Vougain the
following benefits:
• Yourspeed increases by10feel.
I'ART 1ICUSTOM[ZAT10N OI'T[ONSWhen youuse the Dash action, difficultterrain doesn't
costyouextra movement onthat turno
When youmake amelee attack against acreature, you
don't provoke opportunity attacks fromthat creature
forthe rest ofthe turn, whether youhitornol.
MODERATELY ARMORED
Prerequisite: Proficiency with Jightarmor
Vouhave trained tomaster the use ofmedium armor
and shields, gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength orDexterity score by1,toa
maximum of20.
Vougain proficiency with medium armor and shields.
MOUNTED COMBATANT
Vouare adangerous foetofacewhile mounted. While
youare mounted and aren't incapacitated, yougain the
following benefits:
Vouhaveadvantage onmelee attack rolls against any
unmounted creature that issmaller than your mounl.
Voucan forceanattack targeted atyour mount totar-
getyouinstead.
Iryour mount issubjected toaneffectthat allows itto
make aDexterity saving throw totake onlyhalfdam-
age, itinstead takes nodamage ifitsucceeds onthe
saving throw, and onlyhalfdamage ifitfails.
OBSERVANT
Quick tonotice details ofyour environment, yougain
the following benefits:
Increase your Intelligence orWisdom score by1,toa
maximum of20.
Iryoucan see acreature's mouth while itisspeaking
aIanguage youunderstand, youcan interpret what it's
saying byreading itslips.
Vouhavea+5bonus toyour passive Wisdom
(Perception) and passive Intelligence (Investigation)
scores.
POLEARM MASTER
Voucan keepyour enemies atbaywith reach weapons.
Vougain the following benetits:
When youtake theAttack action and attack with only
aglaive,halberd, orquarterstaff, youcan use abonus
action tomake amelee attack with theopposite endof
the weapon. The weapon's damage dieforthis attack
isad4,and the attack deals bludgeoning damage.
While youare wielding aglaive,halberd, pike,orquar-
terstaff, other creatures provoke anopportunity attack
fromyouwhen theyenter your reach.
RESILIENT
Choose oneabilityscore. Vougain the followingbenefits:
Increase thechosen abilityscore by1,toamaximum
of20.
Vougain proficiency insaving throws using the
chosen ability.
RITUAL CASTER
Prerequisite: Intelligence or Wisdom 13orhigher
Vouhave learned anumber ofspells that you can cast as
rituais. These spells are written ina ritual book, which
you must have in hand while casting one ofthem.
When you choose this feat,you aequire a ritual book
holding two 1st-leveispells ofyour ehoiee. Choose one
ofthe following classes: bard, c1erie,druid, soreerer,
warlock, or wizard. Voumust choose your spells
from that c1ass's spelllist, and the spells youchoose
must have the ritual tag. The c1assyou ehoose also
determines your spelleasting ability for these spells:
Charisma forbard, sorcerer, or warloek; Wisdom for
c1ericor druid; or Intelligenee forwizard.
\fyou come aeross aspell inwritten form, sueh as a
magicalspeJl seroJl or awizard's spellbook, you might
be able toadd lttoyour ritual book. The spell must be
on the spelllist for the c1assyou chose, the spell's leveI
ean be no higher than half your levei(rounded up),anditmust have the ritual tag. The proeess ofcopying the
spell intoyour ritual book takes 2hours per leveiofthe
spell, and eosts 50 gpper leveI.The cost represents
material components you expend as you cxperiment
with the spell tomaster it,as well as the fine inks you
need torecord it.
SAVAGEATTACKER
anee per turn when you roll damage fora melee weapon
attaek, you ean reroll the weapon's damage diee and use
either total.
SENTINEL
Vouhave mastered teehniques totake advantage
ofevery drop inany enemy's guard, gaining the
following benefits:
Whcn you hit aereature with an opportunity attack,
the creature's speed beeornes Ofor the rest of
the turn.
PARTI CUSTOMIZ n10 :OP'flO. t
Ih
'70Crealures wilhin 5feel ofyou provoke opporlunity
atlacks from you even ifthey lake lhe Disengage
action bdore leaving your reach.
When acrealure within 5feet ofyou makes an attack
againsl alarget olheI' lhan you (and lhal largel doesn'l
have lhis feal),you can use your reaction lomake a
melee weapon attack against lhe attacking crealure.
SHARPSHOOTER
Vouhave maslered ranged weapons and can lllake
shols thal olhers lind impossible. Vougain the
following benelits:
Attacking ai long range doesn'l impose disadvanlage
onyour ranged weapon attack rolls.
Vour ranged weapon attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarlers cover.
Sdore you make an altack wilh aranged weapon lhal
you are prolicienl wilh, you can choose lotake a -5
penally lolhe attack roll. Ifthe attack hils, you add +10
to lhe attack's damage.
SHIELD MASTER
Vouuse shields notjust for proleclion bul also for
offense. Vougain lhe following benelils while you are
wielding ashield:
Ifyou lake lhe Attack action onyour lurn, you can use
abonus aclion tolry toshove acrealure wilhin 5feel
ofyou wilh your shield.
lfyouaren't incapacilated, youcan add your shield's AC
bonus loany Dexlerity saving lhrow you make against
aspell 01'olheI' harmful effect lhat targets onlyyou.
lfyou are subjecled loan effecl lhal allows you lo
make a Dexlerity saving lhruw lotake only half dam-
age, you ean use your reaclion lolake nodalllage if
you succeed on lhe saving lhrow, interposing your
shield belween yourself and lhe source oflhe effecl.
SKILLED
Vougain proliciency inany combinalion ofthree skills
01'lools ofyourchoice.
SKULKER
Prerequisile: Dexlerily 13OI'higher
Vouare expert al slinking lhrough shadows. Vougain
lhe following benelils:
Voucan try tohide when you are lighlly obscured
from the creature frum which you are hiding.
When you are hidden from acrealure and miss ilwith
a ranged weapon attack, making the attack doesn't
reveal your posilion.
Dilll light docsn'l impose disadvantage onyour
Wisdom (Perceplion) checks relying on sighl.
SPELL SNIPER
Prerequisile: Thc abilily locasl aIleasl one spell
Vouhave learned lechniques toenhance your
attacks wilh cerlain kinds ofspells, gaining the
following benelils:
PART tICUSTOlo.11ZATION OPTlONSWhen you caSl aspell lhal requires you tomake an
attack roll, lhe spell's range isdoubled.
Vourranged spell attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarters cover.
VouJearn one canlrip thal requires an attack roll.
Choose lhe canlrip from lhe bard, cJerie, druid, sor-
cerer,warlock, 01'wizard spelllisl. Vourspellcasting
abilily forlhis cantrip depends on lhe spelllist you
chose from: Charisma forbard, sorcerer, 01'warlock;
Wisdom forcJeric 01'druid; 01'lnlelligence forwizard.
TAVERN BRAWLER
Accuslomed torough-and-lumble lighling using
whalever weapons happen lobe ai hand, you gain lhe
following benelils:
lncrease your Strenglh 01'Constilulion score by I,
toa maximum of20.
Vouare prolicienl wilh improvised weapons and
unarmed slrikes.
Vourunarmed strike uses ad4 fordamage.
When you hil acreature with an unarmed strike 01'an
improvised weapon onyour turn, youcan use abonus
action lOattempl tograpple the targel.
TOUGH
Vour hil point maximum increases byan amount equal
tolwiee your leveIwhen you gain lhis feal. Whenever
you gain a leveilhereafter, your hit point maximum
increases byan addilional 2hil poinls.
WAR CASTER
Prerequisile: The abilily locasl aIleasl one spell
Vouhave pracliced casting spells in the midst of
combal, learning lechniques lhal grant you the
following benelils:
Vouhave advantage on Conslilulion saving lhrows
lhat you lllake lOmainlain your concenlralion on a
spell when you lake damage.
Voucan perform lhe somatie cOlllponenls ofspells
even when you have weapons OI'ashield in one OI'
bolh hands.
When a hoslile crealure's movement provokes an
opportunily attack from you,you can use your reac-
lion locasl aspell at lhe creature, ralheI' than making
an opporlunity altack. The spellmusl have acasling
time of 1aclion and musl larget only lhal crealure.
WEAPON MASTER
Vouhave pracliced extensively with avariely of
weapons, gaining lhe following benelils:
lncrease your Slrength OI'Dexlerily score by 1,loa
maxilllum of20.
Vougain proliciency wilh four weapons ofyour choiee.
PART2
Playing the Garne
PART 2' Pl AYING THE CAME
17
1
CHAPTER7:USINGABILITY SCORES
)IX ABILlTIES PROVIDE A QUICK DESCRIPTION
ofevery creature's physical and mental
characteristics:
Strength, measuring physical power
. Dexterity, measuring agility
• Constitution, measuring endurance
Intelligence, measuring reasoning
and memory
Wisdom, measuring perception and insight
Charisma, measuring force ofpersonality
Isacharacter muscle-bound and insightful? Brilliant
and charming? Nimble and hardy? Ability scores
define these qualities-a creature's assets as well
as weaknesses.
The three main rolls ofthe game-the ability check,
the saving throw, and the attack roll-rely on the six
ability scores. The book's introduction describes the
basic rule behind these rolls: roll ad20, add an ability
modifier derived from one ofthe six ability scores, and
compare the total toa target number.
This chapter focuses on how touse ability checks
and saving throws, covering the fundamental activities
that creatures attempt inthe game. Rules forattack rolls
appear inchapter 9.
ABILITY SCORES AND
MODIFIERS
Each ofacreature's abilities has ascore. a number that
defines the magnitude ofthat ability.An ability score
is notjust a measure ofinnate capabilities, but also
encompasses acreature's training and competence in
activities related tothat ability.
Ascore of 10or II isthe normal human average, but
adventurers and many monsters are acut above average
in most abilities. Ascore of 18isthe highest that a
person usually reaches. Adventurers can have scores
as high as 20, and monsters and divine beings can have
scores as high as 30.
Each ability also has amodifier, derived from the
score and ranging from -5 (foran ability score of I)to
+10(forascore of30). The AbilityScores and Modifiers
table notes the ability modifiers for the range ofpossible
ability scores, from 1to 30.
ABILITY SCORES ANO MOOIFIERS
Score Modifier Score Modifier
1 -5 16-17 +3
2-3 -4 18-19 +4
4-5 -3 20-21 +5
6-7 -2 22-23 +6
8-9 -1 24-25 +7
10-11 +0 26-27 +8
12-13 +1 28-29 +9
14-15 +2 30 +10Todetermine an ability modifier without consulting
the table, subtract 10from the ability score and then
divide the total by2(round down).
Because ability modifiers affect almost every attack
roll, ability check, and saving throw, ability modifiers
come up in play more often than their associated scores .
ADVANTAGE AND
DISADVANTAGE
Sometimes aspecial ability or spell tells you that you
have advantage or disadvantage on an ability check,
asaving throw, or an attack roll. When that happens,
you roll asecond d20 when you make the roll. Use the
higher ofthe two rolls ifyou have advantage, and use
the lower roll ifyou have disadvantage. For example, if
you have disadvantage and roll a 17and a 5,you use the
5.]fyou instead have advantage and roll those numbers,
you use the 17.
]fmultipie situations affect a roll and each one grants
advantage or imposes disadvantage on it,you don't roll
more than one additional d20. Jftwo favorable situations
grant advantage, forexample, you still roll onlyone
additional d20.
Ifcircumstances cause a roll tohave both advantage
and disadvantage, you are considered tohave neither of
them, and you roll one d20. This istrue even ifmultipie
circumstances impose disadvantage and only one grants
advantage or vice versa. Insuch asituation, you have
neither advantage nor disadvantage.
When you have advantage or disadvantage and
something in the game, such as the halfling's Lucky
trait, lets you reroll the d20, you can reroll onlyone
ofthe dice. Vouchoose which one. For example, ifa
halfling has advantage on an ability check and rolls
a 1and a 13,the halfling could use the Lucky trait to
reroll the I.
Vouusually gain advantage or disadvantage through
the use ofspecial abilities, actions, or spells. Inspiration
(see chapter 4)can also give acharacler advantage on
checks related tothe character's personality, ideais,
or bonds. The DMcan also decide that circumstances
influence aroll inone direction or the other and grant
advantage or impose disadvantage as aresult.
PROFICIENCY BONUS
Characters have a proficiency bonus determined by
levei, as detailed in chapter I. Monsters also have this
bonus, which isincorporated intheir stat blocks. The
bonus isused in the rules on ability checks, saving
throws, and attack rolls.
Your proficiency bonus can't be added toasingle die
roll or other number more than once. For example, if
two different rules sayyou can add your proficiency
bonus toaWisdom saving throw, you nevertheless add
the bonus only once when you make the savc.
Occasionally, your proficiency bonus might be
multiplied or divided (doubled or halved, forexample)
PART 2 USING ABILlTY SCORES
SKILLSis holding dosed. In situations like these, the outcome
is determined bya special form of ability check,
called a contest.
Both participants in a contest make ability checks
appropriate to their efforts. They apply ali appropriate
bonuses and penalties, but instead of comparing the
total to a DC, they compare the totaIs of their two
checks. The participant with the higher check total wins
the contest. That character ar monster either succeeds
at the action or prevents the other one from succeeding.
Ifthe contest results in a tie, the situation remains the
same as it was before the contest. Thus, one contestant
might win the contest by default. Iftwo characters tie in
a contest to snatch a ring offthe fioor, neither character
grabs it. In a contest between a monster trying to open
a doar and an adventurer trying to keep the doar dosed,
a tie means that the door remains shut.
Each ability covers a broad range ofcapabilities,
induding skills that a character or a monster can be
proficient in. Askill represents a specific aspect ofan
ability score, and an individual's proficiency in a skill
demonstrates a focus on that aspect. (Acharacter's
starting skill proficiencies are determined at character
creation, and a monster's skill proficiencies appear in
the monster's stat block.)
For example, a Dexterity check might refiect a
character's attempt to pull offan acrobatic stunt, to paIm
an object, or to stay hidden. Each of these aspects of
Dexterity has an associated skill: Acrobatics, Sleight of
Hand, and Stealth, respectively. So a character who has
proficiency in the Stealth skill is particularly good at
Dexterity checks related to sneaking and hiding.
The skills related to each ability score are shown in
the following list. (No skills are related to Constitution.)
See an ability's description in the later sections ofthis
chapter for examples of how to use a skill associated
with an ability.before you apply it. For example, the rogue's Expertise
feature doubles the proficiency bonus for certain ability
checks. Ifa circumstance suggests that your proficiency
bonus applies more than once to the same roll, you still
add it only once and multiply or divide it only once.
By the same token, ifa feature ar effect allows you
to multiply your proficiency bonus when making an
ability check that wouldn't normally benefit from your
proficiency bonus, you still don't add the bonus to the
check. For that check your proficiency bonus is O,given
the fact that multiplying Oby any number is still O.For
instance, ifyou lack proficiency in the History skill,
you gain no benefit from a feature that lets you double
your proficiency bonus when you make Intelligence
(History) checks.
In general, you don't multiply your proficiency bonus
for attack rolls or saving throws. Ifa feature ar effect
allows you to do so, these same rules apply.
ABILITY CHECKS
An ahility check tests a character's ar monster's innate
talent and training in an effort to overcome a challenge.
The DM calls for an ability check when a character ar
monster attempts an aclion (other than an attack) that
has a chance of failure. When the outcome is uncertain,
the dice determine the results.
For every ability check, the DMdecides which ofthe six
abilities is relevant to the task at hand and the difficulty
ofthe task, represented bya Difficulty Class. The more
difficult a task, the higher its DC. The Typical Difficulty
Classes table shows the most common DCs.
TVPICAL DIFFICULTV CLASSES
Task Difficulty DC
Veryeasy 5
Easy 10
Medium 15
Ha~ 20
Very hard 25
Nearly impossible 30
To make an ability check, roll a d20 and add the
relevant ability modifier. As with other d20 rolls, apply
bonuses and penalties, and compare the total to the De.
Ifthe total equals or exceeds the DC, the ability check
is a success-the creature overcomes the challenge
at hand. Otherwise, it's a failure, which means the
character or monster makes no progress toward the
objective ar makes progress combined with a setback
determined by the DM.
CONTESTSStrength
Athletics
Dexterity
Acrobatics
Sleight of Hand
Stealth
Intelligence
Arcana
History
Investigation
Nature
ReligionWisdom
Animal Handling
Insight
Medicine
Perception
Survival
Charisma
Deception
Intimidation
Performance
Persuasion
174Sometimes one character's or monster's efforts are
directly apposed to another's. This can accur when both
of them are trying to do the same thing and only one
can succeed, such as attempting to snatch up a magic
ring that has fallen on the fioor. This situation also
applies when ane of them is trying to prevent the other
one from accomplishing a goal-for example, when a
monster tries to force open a doar that an adventurer
PART 2IUSING ABIUTV SCORESSometimes, the DM might ask for an ability check
using a specific skill-for example, "Make a Wisdom
(Perception) check." At other times, a player might ask
the DM if proficiency in a particular skill applies to a
check. In either case, proficiency in a skill means an
individual can add his ar her proficiency bonus to ability
checks that involve that skill. Without proficiency in the
skill, the individual makes a normal ability check.
For example, ifa characler attempts lo climb up a
dangerous cliff,lhe Dungeon Masler mighl ask for a
Slrenglh (Alhlelics) check. lf lhe characler is proficienl
in Athletics, the characler's proficiency bonus is added
to lhe Slrenglh check. lf lhe characler lacks that
proficicncy, he or she JUSlmakes a Slrenglh check.
VARIANT: SKILLS WITH DIFFERENT ABILITIES
Normally, your proficiency in a skill applies only lo a
specific kind ofabilily check. Proficiency in Alhlelics,
for example, usually applics lo Slrenglh checks. In some
situations, lhough, your proficiency mighl reasonably
apply lo a differenl kind ofcheck. In such cases, lhe DM
mighl ask for a check using an unusual combinalion of
abilily and skill, or you mighl ask your DMifyou can
applya proficiency to a differenl check. For example,
ifyou have lo swim from an offshore island to lhe
mainland, your DMmighl call for a Conslilulion check
lo see ifyou have the stamina lo make itthat faroIn lhis
case, your DMmighl allow you to apply your proficiency
in Alhlelics and ask fora Constilulion (Alhlelics) check.
So ifyou're proficienl in Alhlelics, you apply your
proficiency honus to lhe Conslilulion checkjusl as you
would normally do for a Slrenglh (Alhlelics) check.
SimilarIy, when your half-orc barbarian uses a display
of raw slrenglh to inlimidale an enemy, your DM mighl
ask fora Strength (Inlimidalion) check, evenlhough
Intimidalion is normally associaled wilh Charisma.
PASSIVE CHECKS
A passive check is a special kind ofabilily check lhal
doesn'l involve any die rolls. Such a check can represenl
lhe average resull for a task done repealedly, such as
searching for secrel doors over and over again. or can
be used when the DMwanls lo secretly determine
whelher lhe characters succeed at something wilholll
rolling dice, such as nOlicing a hidden monsler.
Here's how lo delermine a character's lolal for a
passive check:
10+ali modifiers thal normally apply to the check
Ifthe characler has advanlage on lhe check, add 5. For
disadvanlage, suhlract 5. The game refers lo a passive
check lotai as a score.
For example. ifa 1st-levei character has a Wisdom of
15and proficiency in Perceplion. he or she has a passive
Wisdom (Perceplion) score of 14.
The rules on hiding in lhe "Dexlerily" section below
rely on passive cbecks, as do lhe exploralion rules
in chapler 8.
WORKING TOGETHER
Some times lwo or more characlers leam up to allempt a
lask. The characler who's leading lhe effort-or lhe one
wilb lhe highesl abilily modifier-can make an ability
cbeck wilh advanlage, reflecling the help provided by
the olher characlers. In combal, lhis requires lhe Help
aclion (see chapler 9).
Acharacter can only provide help iflhe lask is one lhat
he or she cOllldallempt alone. For example, trying lo
open a lock requires proficiency wilh lhieves' lools, so acharacler who lacks lhat proficiency can't help anolher
characler in lhal task. Moreover, a character can help
only when two or more individuais working logelher
would aclually be produclive. Some lasks, such as
lbreading a needle. are no easier with help.
GROUP CHECKS
When a number ofindividuais are lrying to accomplish
somelhing as a group, lhe DMmighl ask fora group
abilily check. In such a situalion, lhe characters who are
skilled ai a parlicular task help cover those who aren'l.
To make a group ability check. everyone in lbe group
makes lbe abilily check. lfalleasl half lhe group
sllcceeds, the wbole group succeeds. Otherwise,
lhe group fails.
Group checks don't come up very often. and lhey're
most useful wben ali lhe characlers succeed or
fail as a group. For example, when advenlurcrs arc
navigating a swamp, lbe DMmighl call for a group
Wisdom (Survival) check lo see iflhe characlers can
avoid lhe quicksand, sinkholcs, and other natural
hazards oflhe environmenl. Ifat least half the group
succeeds, lhe successful characlers are ablc to guide
lhcir companions oul ofdanger. Olherwise, lhe group
slumbles inlo one oflhese hazards.
USINGEACHABILITY
Every lask lhal a characler or monsler mighl atlempt
in the game is covered byone oflhe six abililies. This
seclion explains in more delail wbal lhose abilities
mean and the ways lhey are used in lhe game.
STRENGTH
Slrenglh measures bodily power, athlelic training, and
the exlenllo which you can exert raw physical force.
STRENGTH CHECKS
ASlrenglh check can model any atlempllo lifl, p"sh,
pull, or break something, lo force your body lhrougb a
space, or lo otherwise apply brute force lo a silualion.
The Alhlelics skill reflecls aptitude in cerlain kinds of
Slrength checks.
Athletics. Your Strenglh (Alhlelics) check covers
difficult situations YOllencollnler while c1imbing,
jumping. or swimming. Examples include tbe
following aclivilies:
Youattempt lo climh a sheer or slippery cliff,avoid
hazards while scaling a wall, or cling lo a surface
while something is lrying to knock you off.
Youtry lojump an unuslIally long distance or pull
offa slunl midjump.
Youslruggle lo swim or slay afloal in lreacherous cur-
renls, slorm-lossed waves, or areas oflhick seaweed.
Or anolher crealure lries lo push or pull you underwa-
ler or olherwise interfere with your swimming.
Other Strength Checks. The DMmighl also call for
a Slrcngtb check when you lry to accomplish tasks like
lhe following:
PART 2 LJSL G -\BILlIT S i)RE
'j6Force open a stuck, locked, or barred door
Break free ofbonds
Push through a tunnel that is too small
Hang on to a wagon while being dragged behind it
Tip over a statue
Keep a boulder from rolling
ATTACK ROLLS AND DAMAGE
Vouadd your Strength modifier toyour attack roll and
your damage roll when attacking with a melee weapon
such as a mace, a battleaxe, or ajavelin. Vouuse
melee weapons to make melee attacks in hand-to-hand
combat, and some ofthem can be thrown to make a
ranged attack.
LIFTING AND CARRYING
Vour Strength score determines the amount ofweight
you can bear. The following terms define what you can
lift or carry.
Carrying Capacity. Vour carrying capacity isyour
Strength score multiplied by 15.This is the weight (in
pounds) that you can carry, which is high enough that
most characlers don't usually have to worry about it.
Push, Drag, arLirt.Voucan push, drag, or lifta
weighl in pounds up to lwice your carrying capacity
(or 30 times your Slrength score). While pushing or
dragging wcight in excess ofyour carrying capacity,
your speed drops lo 5 fee!.
Size and Strength. Larger crealures can bear more
weighl, whereas Tiny creatures can carry less. For
each size calegory above Medium, double lhe creature's
carrying capacity and lhe amount ilcan push, drag, or
lif!. For a Tiny creature, halve lhese weighls.
PART2IUSING ABILlTY soaREsVARIANT: ENCUMBRANCE
The rules for lifling and carrying are inlentionally
simple. Here is a variant ifyou are looking for more
detailed rules for delermining how a characler is
hindered bythe weighl ofequipmen!. When you use this
varianl, ignore lhe Strength column ofthe Armor table
in chapter 5.
Ifyou carry weight in excess of 5 times your Strength
score, you are encumbered, which means your speed
drops by 10fee!.
Ifyou carry weighl in excess of 10times your
Slrenglh score, up toyour maximum carrying capacity,
you are instead heavily encumbered, which means your
speed drops by 20 feet and you have disadvanlage on
ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws that use
Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution.
DEXTERITY
Dexterily measures agility, reflexes, and balance.
DEXTERITY CHECKS
ADexterity check can model any attempt to move
nimbly, quickly, or quietly, or to keep from falling
on tricky footing. The Acrobatics, Sleight ofHand,
and Stealth skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of
Dexterity checks.
Acrobatics. Vour Dexterity (Acrobatics) check covers
your attempt to stay on your feet in a tricky situation,
such as when you're trying to run across a sheet ofice,
balance on a tightrope, or stay upright on a rocking
ship's deck. The DMmight also call for a Dexterity
(Acrobatics) check to see ifyou can perform acrobatic
stunts, including dives, rolls, somersaults, and flips.
Sleight afHand. Whenever youattempt anactof
legerdemain ormanual triekery, such asplanting
something onsomeone else orconcealing anobject on
yaur person, make aDexterity (Sleight ofHand)check.
The DMmight also callforaDexterity (Sleight ofHand)
check todetermine whether youcan liftacoinpurse off
another person orslipsomething outofanother
person's pocket.
SteaJth.MakeaDexterity (Stealth) check whenyou
attempt toconceal yourself fromenemies, slink past
guards, slipawaywithout being notieed, orsneak upon
someone without being seen orheard.
Other Dexterity Checks. The DMmight callfora
Dexterity check whenyoutrytoaccomplish tasks like
the following:
Control aheavilyJadencart onasteep descent
Steer achariot around atightturo
Pickalock
Disable atrap
Securely tieupaprisoner
Wriggle freeofbonds
Playa stringed instrument
Craftasmall ordetailed object
ATTACK ROLLS AND DAMAGE
Vouaddyour Dexterity modifier toyourattack rolland
your damage rollwhen attacking witharanged weapon,
such asasling oralongbow. Voucan also addyour
Dexterity modifier toyourattack rollandyourdamage
rollwhen attacking withamelee weapon that has the
finesse property, such asadagger orarapier.
4 ~
HIDING
When you try to hide, make a Dexterity (Stealth) check. Until
you are discovered or you stop hiding, that check's total is
contested bythe Wisdom (Perception) check ofany creature
that actively searches for signs ofyour presence.
Youcan't hide from acreature that can see you. and ifyou
make noise (such as shouting awarning or knocking over a
vase), you give away your position. An invisible creature can't
be seen,50itcan always try to hide. Signs of its passage
might still be noticed, however, and itstill has to stay quiet.
Incombat, most creatures stay alert for signs ofdanger
aliaround,50ifyou come out of hiding and approach
acreature, itusually sees you. However, under certain
circumstances, the Dungeon Master might allow you to stay
hidden as you approach acreature that isdistracted, allowing
you to gain advantage on an attack before you are seen.
Passive Pereeptian. When you hide, there's achance
someone will notice you even ifthey aren't searching. To
determine whether such acreature notices you, the DM
compares your Dexterity (Stealth) check with that creature's
passive Wisdom (Perception) score, which equals 10 +the
creature's Wisdom modifier, as well as any other bonuses
or penalties. Ifthe creature has advantage, add 5.For
disadvantage, subtract 5.
For example, ifa lst.level character (with aproficiency
bonus of +2) has aWisdom of 15 (a+2 modifier) and
proficiency in Perception, he or she has apassive Wisdom
(Perception) of 14.
What Can You See? One ofthe main factors indetermining
whether you can find ahidden creature or object ishow well
you can see inan area, which might be lightly or heavily
obscured, as explained inchapter 8.
~ ~ARMOR CLASS
Depending onthearmor youwear,youmight addsome
oralIofyour Dexterity modifier toyourArmor Class,
asdescribed inchapter 5.
INITlATIVE
Atthebeginning ofeverycombat, yourollinitiative
bymaking aDexterity check. lnitiative determines
theorder ofcreatures' turos incombat, asdescribed
inchapter 9.
CONSTITUTION
Constitution measures health, stamina, andvitalforce.
CONSTlTUTlON CHECKS
Constitution checks are uncommon, and noskills apply
toConstitution checks, because theendurance this
abilityrepresents islargely passive rather than involving
aspecific effortonthepart ofacharacter ormonster.
AConstitution checkcan modelyourattempt topush
beyond normallimits, however.
The DMmight callforaConstitution check whenyou
trytoaccomplish tasks likethefollowing:
Holdyourbreath
March orlabor forhours without rest
Gowithout sleep
Survive without foodorwater
Quaffanentire stein ofaleinonego
HIT POINTS
YourConstitution modifier contributes toyourhit
points. Typieally,youaddyourConstitution modifier to
each HitDieyourollforyour hitpoints.
Ifyour Constitution modifier changes, your hitpoint
maximum changes aswell,asthough youhadthe new
modifier from 1stleveI.Forexample, ifYotlraise your
Constittltion score whenyoureach 4th leveiandyour
Constitution modifier increases from+1to+2,you
adjust your hitpoint maximum asthough themodifier
hadalways been +2.Soyouadd3hitpoints foryour
firstthree leveis,and then rollyour hitpoints for4th
leveiusingyournewmodifier. Orifyou're 7thleveiand
some effectlowers yourConstitution score soasto
reduce yourConstitution modifier by1,Yotlrhitpoint
maximum isreduced by7.
INTELLIGENCE
lntelligence measures mental acuity.accuracy ofrecall,
and theabilitytoreason.
INTELLIGENCE CHECKS
Anlntelligence check comes intoplaywhenyouneed
todraw onlogie,education, memory, ordeductive
reasoning. TheArcana, History, Investigation, Nature,
and Religion skills reflectaptitude incertain kinds of
lntelligence checks.
Arcana.YourIntelligence (Arcana) check measures
your abilitytorecalllore about spells, magie items,
e1dritchsymbols, magical traditions, theplanes of
existence, and theinhabitants ofthose planes.
History.YourIntelligence (History) check measures
yourabilitytorecalllore about historieal events,
PART 2IUSING AB1LlTY SCORES
,.••
•••4
FINDING A HIDDEN OB)ECT
When your characler searches for a hidden objecl such as
a secrel doar or a lrap, lhe DM lypically asks you lo make a
Wisdom (Perceplion) check. Such a check can be used lo find
hidden delalls or olher informalion and clues lhal you mighl
olherwise overlook.
In mosl cases, you need lo describe where you are looking
in order for lhe DM lo delermine your chance of success. For
example, a key is hidden benealh a seI of folded clolhes in
lhe lop drawer of a bureau. Ifyou lell lhe DM lhal you pace
around lhe room, looking aI lhe walls and fumilure for clues,
you have no chance of finding lhe key, regardless of your
Wisdom (Perceplion) check resull. Vou would have lo specify
lhal you were opening lhe drawers or searching lhe bureau in
order lo have any chance of success.
For example, you mighl try to hear a conversation
through a closed door, eavesdrap under an open window,
or hear monslers moving slealthily in the fores!. Or you
might try lo spol lhings that are obscured or easy to
miss, whether they are orcs Iying in ambush on a road,
lhugs hiding in lhe shadows of an alley, or candlelight
under a closed secret door.
Survival. The DM might ask you to make a Wisdom
(Survival) check to follow tracks, hunt wild game, guide
your group through frazen waslelands, identify signs
that owlbears live nearby, predict the weather, or avoid
quicksand and olher natural hazards.
Other Wisdom Checks. The DM mighl call for a
Wisdom check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:
Gel a gul feeling about what course of action lo follow
Discern whether a seemingly dead or living creature
is undead
WISDOMSPELLCASTING ABILITY
Wizards use Intelligence as their spellcasting ability,
which helps determine the saving throw DCs of
spells they cas!.legendary people, ancient kingdoms, past disputes,
recent wars, and lost civilizations.
Investil1ation. When you look araund for clues and
make deductions based on those clues. you make an
Intelligence (Investigation) check. Vou might deduce the
location of a hidden object, discern fram the appearance
of a wound what kind of weapon dealt it, or determine
the weakest point in a tunnelthat could cause itto
collapse. Poring through ancient scralls in search of
a hidden fragment of knowledge might also call for an
Intelligence (Investigalion) check.
Nature. Vour Intelligence (Nature) check measures
your ability to recalllore aboutterrain, plants and
animais, the weather. and natural cycles.
ReJil1ion. Vour Intelligence (Religion) check measures
your ability to recalllore about deities, rites and prayers,
religious hierarchies, holy symbols, and the practices
of secret cults.
Other InteJlil1ence Checks. The DM might call for an
Intelligence check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:
Communicate with a creature without using words
Estimate the value of a precious item
Pulltogether a disguise to pass as a city guard
Forge a document
Recalllore about a craft or trade
Win a game of skill
Wisdom reflects how attuned you are to the world
around you and represents perceptiveness and intuition.
WISDOM CHECKS
A Wisdom check might reflect an effort to read body
language, understand someone's feelings, notice things
aboutthe environment, or care for an injured person.
The Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception,
and Survival skills reflect aptitude in certa in kinds of
Wisdom checks.
Animal HandJinl1. When there is any question
whether you can calm down a domesticated animal,
keep a mount fram getting spooked, or intuit an animal's
intentions, the DM might call for a Wisdom (Animal
Handling) check. Vou also make a Wisdom (Animal
Handling) check to contrai your mount when you attempt
a risky maneuver.
Insil1ht. Vour Wisdom (Insight) check decides whether
you can determine the true intentions of a creature, such
as when searching out a lie or predicting someone's
next move. Doing so involves gleaning clues fram body
language, speech habits, and changes in mannerisms.
Medicine. A Wisdom (Medicine) check lets you try to
stabilize a dying companion or diagnose an illness.
Perception. Vour Wisdom (Perception) check lets
you spot, hear, or otherwise detect the presence of
something. It measures your general awareness of
your surroundings and the keenness ofyour senses.SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Clerics, druids, and rangers use Wisdom as their
spellcasting ability, which helps determine the saving
throw DCs of spells they cas!.
CHARISMA
Charisma measures your ability to interact effectively
with others. It includes such factors as confidence
and eloquence, and it can represent a charming or
commanding personality.
CHARISMA CHECKS
A Charisma check might arise when you lry to influence
or entertain others, when you try to make an impression
or tell a convincing lie, or when you are navigating a
tricky social situation. The Deception, Intimidation,
Performance, and Persuasion skills reflect aptitude in
certain kinds of Charisma checks.
Deception. Vour Charisma (Deception) check
determines whether you can convincingly hide the
trulh, eilher verbally or lhrough your actions. This
deception can encompass everything fram misleading
others through ambiguity to telling outright lies. Typical
situations include trying to fast-talk a guard, con a
merchanl, earn money through gambling, pass yourself
off in a disguise, dull someone's suspicions with false
assurances, or maintain a straight face while telling
a blatantlie.
PART 2 IUSING ABILITY seORES
Intimidation.When youattempt toinfluence someone
through overt threats, hostile actions, andphysical
violence, theDMmight askyoutomake aCharisma
(Intimidation) check. Examples include trying topry
information outofaprisoner, convincing street thugs
tobackdown fromaconfrontation, arusing theedge of
abroken bottle toconvince asneering vizierto
reconsider adecision.
Performance.YourCharisma (Performance) check
determines howwellyoucan delight anaudience with
music, dance, acting, storytelling, arsome other formof
entertainment.
Persuasion.When youattempt toinfluence someone
oragroup ofpeople withtact. social graces, argood
nature, theDMmight askyoutomake aCharisma
(Persuasion) check. Typically,youuse persuasion when
acting ingoodfaith,tofoster friendships, make cordial
requests, arexhibit proper etiquette. Examples of
persuading others include convincing achamberlain to
letyourparty see theking,negotiating peace between
warring tribes, arinspiring acrowd oftownsfolk.
Other Charisma Checks. The DMmight callfora
Charisma checkwhenyoutrytoaccomplish tasks like
the following:
Findthe best person totalktofornews, rumors,
andgossip
Blendintoacrowd togetthesense ofkeytopics
ofconversation
SPELLCASTING ABILITY
Bards, paladins, sorcerers. andwarlocks useCharisma
astheir spellcasting ability,which helps determine the
saving throw DCsofspells theycast.
SAVING THROWS
Asaving throw-also called asave-represents an
attempt toresist aspell, atrap, apoison, adisease, ar
asimilar threat. Voudon't normally decide tomake a
saving throw; youare forced tomake onebecause your
character armonster isatriskofharm.
Tomake asaving throw, rollad20and addthe
appropriate ability modifier. Forexample, youuseyour
Dexterity modifier foraDexterity saving throw.
Asaving throw canbemodified byasituational
bonus arpenalty andcan beaffected byadvantage
and disadvantage, asdetermined bythe DM.
Eachclass givesproficiency inatleast twosaving
throws. The wizard, forexample, isproficient
inIntelligence saves. Aswithskillproficiencies,
proficiency inasavingthrowletsacharacter addhis
arherproficiencybonus tosaving throws madeusing
aparticular abilityscore. Some monsters havesaving
throw proficiencies aswell.
The DifficultyClass forasaving throw isdetermined
bytheeffectthat causes it.Forexample, the DCfora
saving throw allowed bya spell isdetermined bythe
caster's spellcasting abilityandproficiency bonus.
Theresult ofasuccessful arfailedsaving throw is
also detailed intheeffeelthat allows thesave. Usually,
asuccessful savemeans that acreature suffers no
harm, arreduced harm, fromaneffect.
CHAPTER 8:ADVENTURING
ELVING INTO THE ANCIENT TOMB orHORRORS.
slipping through the back alleys of
Waterdeep, hacking a fresh trail through
the thick jungles on the Isle of Dread-these
are the things that DUNGEONS & DRAGONS
adventures are made of. Your character in
the game might explore forgotten ruins and
uncharted lands, uncover dark secrets and sinister
plots, and slay foul monsters. And if ali goes well, your
character will survive to claim rich rewards before
embarking on a new adventure.
This chapter covers the basics of the adventuring life,
from the mechanics of movement to the complexities of
social interaction. The rules for resting are also in this
chapter, along with a discussion of the activities your
character might pursue between adventures.
Whether adventurers are exploring a dusty dungeon
or the complex relationships ofa royal court, the game
follows a natural rhythm, as outlined in the book's
introduction:
I. The DM describes the environmenl.
2. The players describe what they want to do.
3. The DM narrates the results of their actions.
Typically, the DM uses a map as an outline of the
adventure, tracking the characters' progress as they
explore dungeon corridors or wilderness regions.
The DM's notes, including a key to thc map, describe
what the adventurers lind as they enter each new area.
Sometimes, the passage of time and the adventurers'
actions determine what happens, so the DM might
use a timeline or a flowchart to track their progress
instead of a map.
TIME
In situations where keeping track of the passage of
time is important, the DM determines the time a task
requires. The DM might use a different time scale
depending on the context of the situation at hand. In
a dungeon environment, the adventurers' movement
happens on a scale of minutes. lt takes them about a
minute to creep down a long hallway, another minute
to check for traps on the door at the end of the hall, and
a good ten minutes to search the chamber beyond for
anything interesting or valuable.
In a city or wilderness, a scale ofhours is often more
appropriate. Adventurers eager to rcach the lonely tower
at the heart of the forest hurry across those fifteen miles
injust under four hours' time.
For long journeys, a scale of days works besl.
Following the road from Baldur's Gate to Waterdeep, the
adventurers spend four uneventful days before a goblin
ambush interrupts their journey.
In combat and other fast-paced situations, the game
relies on rounds, a 6-second span of time described
in chapter 9.MOVEMENT
Swimming across a rushing river, sneaking down a
dungeon corridor, scaling a treacherous mountain slope-
ali sorts ofmovement play a key role in D&D adventures.
The DMcan summarize the adventurers' movement
without calculating exact distances or traveI times: "You
travei through the forest and find the dungeon entrance
late in the evening of the third day." Even in a dungeon,
particularlya large dungeon or a cave network, the
DM can summarize movement between encounters:
"After killing the guardian at the entrance to the ancient
dwarven stronghold, you consult your map, which leads
you through miJes of echoing corridors to a chasm
bridged bya narrow stone arch."
Sometimes it's important, though, to know how long
ittakes to get from one spot to another, whether the
answer is in days, hours, or minutes. The rules for
determining traveI time depend on two factors: the
speed and traveI pace of the creatures moving and the
terrain they're moving over.
SPEED
Every character and monster has a speed, which is
the distance in feet that the character or monster
can walk in 1round. This number assumes short
bursts ofenergetic movement in the midst of a life-
threatening situation.
The following rules determine how far a character
or monster can move in a minute, an hour, or a day.
TRAVEL PACE
While traveling, a group of adventurers can move at a
normal, fast, or slow pace, as shown on the Travei Pace
table. The table states how far the party can move in a
period of time and whether the pace has any effecl. A
fast pace makes characters less perceptive, while a slow
pace makes it possible to sneak around and to search an
area more carefully (see the "ActivityWhile Traveling"
section later in this chapter for more information).
Forced March. The Travei Pace table assumes that
characters traveI for 8 hours in day. They can push on
beyond that limit, at the risk ofexhaustion.
For each additional hour of traveI beyond 8 hours,
the characters cover the distance shown in the Hour
column for their pace, and each character must make
a Constitution saving throw at the end of the hour. The
DC is 10+1for each hour past 8 hours. On a failed
saving throw, a character suffers one leveI of exhaustion
(see appendix A).
Mounts and Vehicles. For short spans of time (up
to an hour), many animaIs move much faster than
humanoids. Amounted character can ride at a gallop
for about an hour, covering twice the usual distance for
a fast pace. Iffresh mounts are available every 8 to 10
miles, characters can cover larger distances at this pace,
but this is very rare except in uensely populated areas.
PAR1 2 I ADVEN1URINC
181
Characters inwagons, carriages, orother land
vehicles choose apace as normal. Characters ina
waterborne vessel are limited tothe speed ofthe vessel
(seechapter 5),and theydon't suffer penalties forafast
pace orgain benefits fromaslowpace, Depending on
the vessel and the size ofthe crew,ships might beable
totravei forupto24hours per day,
Certain speciai mounts, such as apegasus orgriffon,
orspecial vehicles, such as a carpet of f!ying, allowyou
totraveImore swiftly,The Dungeon Master's Cuide
contains more information onspecial methods oftraveI.
TRAVEL PACE
Pace
FastDistance Traveled per, ,.
Minute Hour Day
400 feet 4miles 30 milesEffect
-5 penalty to
passive Wisdom
(Perception) scoresDC10Strength (Athletics)check toclear alowobstacle
(notaller than aquarter ofthejump's distance), such as
ahedge orlowwall.Otherwise. youhitit.
When youland indifficultterrain. youmust succeed
ona DC10Dexterity (Acrobatics) check toland onyour
feet.Otherwise. youland prone.
HighJump. When youmake ahighjump. youleap
intothe air anumber offeetequal to3 +your Strength
modifier ifyou moveatleast 10feetonfootimmediately
before thejump. When youmake astanding highjump,
youcanjump onlyhalfthat distance. Either way,each
footyouclear onthejump costs afootofmovement. In
some circumstances. your DMmight allowyoutomake
aStrength (Athletics)check tojump higher than you
normally cano
Voucan extend your arms halfyour height above
yourself during thejump. Thus. youcan reach above
youadistance equal tothe height ofthejump plus 1 Vi
times your height.
Normal
Slow300 feel 3miles 24 miles
200 feel 2miles 18miles Ablelo use stealth ACTIVITY WHILE TRAVELING
DIFFICULT TERRAIN
The traveIspeeds giveninthe TraveiPace table
assume relativelysimple terrain: roads, open plains,
orclear dungeon corridors. Butadventurers oftenface
dense forests, deep swamps, rubble-filled ruins, steep
mountains, and ice-covered ground-all considered
difficultterrain.
Voumoveathalfspeed indifficultterrain-moving
1footindifficultterrain costs 2feetofspeed-so you
can coveronlyhalfthe normal distance inaminute.
an hour,oraday.
SPECIAL TYPES OF MOVEMENT
Movement through dangerous dungeons orwilderness
areas ofteninvolvesmore than simplywalking.
Adventurers might havetoclimb,crawl. swim, orjump
togetwhere theyneed togo.
CUMBING, SWIMMING. AND CRAWUNG
While climbing orswimming, each footofmovement
costs 1extra foot(2extra feetindifficultterrain). unless
acreature has aclimbing orswimming speed. Atthe
DM'soption, climbing aslippery vertical surface or
onewith fewhandholds requires asuccessful Strength
(Athletics)check. Similarly, gaining anydistance in
rough water might require asuccessful Strength
(Athletics)check.
jUMPING
YourStrength determines howfaryoucanjump.
LongJump. When youmake a10ngjump.youcovera
number offeetuptoyour Strength score ifyoumoveat
leasl10feet011foolimmedialely before thejump. When
youmake astanding longjump, youcan leap onlyhalf
that distance. Eilher way,each foolyouclear onthe
jump costs afootofmovement.
This rule assumes that the heighl ofyourjump
doesn't maller. such as ajump across astream or
chasm. Atyour DM'soption,youmust succeed ona
PART 2IADVENTURINOAsadventurers traveithrough adungeon orthe
wilderness, theyneed toremain alert fordanger, and
some characters might perform other tasks tohelp
the group's journey.
MARCHING ORDER
The adventurers should establish amarching order.
Amarching order makes iteasier todetermine which
characters are affected bytraps. which ones can spot
hidden enemies, and which ones are the closest tothose
enemies when afightbreaks out.
Acharacter might occupythe front rank. one ormore
middle ranks. orthe back rank. Characters inthe front
and back ranks need enough room totraveiside by
side with others intheir rank. When space istoa tight,
the marching order must change, usually bymoving
characters toamiddle rank.
Fewer Than Three Ranks. Ifanadventuring party
arranges itsmarching order withonlytworanks, they
are afrontrank and abackrank. Ifthere's onlyone rank,
it'sconsidered afront rank.
STEALTH
While traveling ataslowpace. the characters can move
stealthily. Aslongas they're notinthe open, theycan try
tosurprise orsneak byother creatures theyencounter.
See the rules forhiding inchapter 7.
NOTICING THREATS
Usethe passive Wisdom (Perception) scores ofthe
characters todetermine whether anyone inthe group
notices ahidden threat. The DMmightdecide that a
threat can benoticed onlybycharacters inaparticular
rank. Forexample, as the characters are exploring a
maze oftunnels. the DMmight decide that onlythose
characters inthe back rank have achance tohear or
spot astealthy creature followingthe group, while
characters inthe front and middle ranks cannot.
While traveling atafast pace. characters take a -5
penalty totheir passive Wisdom (Perception) scores
tonotice hidden threats.
Encountering Creatures. If the DM determines
that the adventurers eneounter other ereatures while
they're traveling, it's up to both groups to decide what
happens next. Either group might decide to attaek,
initiate a eonversation, run away, or wait to see what the
other group does.
Surprising Foes. If the adventurers eneounter a
hostile ereature or group, the DM determines whether
the adventurers or their foes might be surprised when
eombat erupts. See ehapter 9 for more about surprise.
OTHER ACTIVITIES
Charaeters who turn their attention to other tasks as the
group travels are not foeused on watehing for danger.
These eharaeters don't eontribute their passive Wisdom
(Pereeption) seores to the group's chance of noticing
hidden threats. However, a eharaeter not watehing for
danger ean do one of the following aetivities instead, or
some other aetivity with the DM's permission.
Navigate. The eharaeter ean try to prevent the group
from beeoming 10st, making a Wisdom (Survival) eheek
when the DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's Cuide
has rules to determine whether the group gets lost.)
Drawa Map. The eharaeter ean draw a map
that reeords the group's progress and helps the
eharaeters get baek on eourse if they get 10st. No ability
eheek is required.
Track. A eharaeter ean follow the traeks of another
ereature, making a Wisdom (Survival) eheek when the
DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's Cuide has rules
for traeking.)
Forage. The eharaeter ean keep an eye out for ready
sourees of food and water, making a Wisdom (Survival)
eheek when the DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's
Cuide has rules for foraging.)
THE ENVIRONMENT
By its nature, adventuring involves delving into plaees
that are dark, dangerous, and full of mysteries to be
explored. The rules in this seetion eover some of the
most important ways in whieh adventurers interaet with
the environment in sueh plaees. The Dungeon Master's
Cuide has rules eovering more unusual situations.
FALLING
A fali from a great height is one of the most eommon
hazards facing an adventurer.
At the end of a fali, a ereature takes Id6 bludgeoning
damage for every 10 feet it fell, to a maximum of 20d6.
The ereature lands prone, unless it avoids taking
damage from the fali.
SUFFOCATING
A ereature ean hold its breath for a number of minutes
equal to I +its Constitution modifier (minimum
of 30 seeonds).
When a ereature runs out of breath, it ean survive for
a number of rounds equal to its Constitution modifier
(minimum I round). At the start of its next turn, it drops
to Ohit points and is dying.4 •
SPLITTING UpTHE PARTY
Sometimes, it makes sense to split an adventuring party,
espeeially if you wanl one or more eharaelers lo seoul ahead.
You ean form mulliple parties, eaeh moving at a different speed.
Eaeh group has ils own fronl, middle, and baek ranks.
lhe drawbaek lo lhis approaeh is lhal lhe party will be splil
inlo several smaller groups in lhe evenl of an allack. lhe
advanlage is lhal a small group of sleallhy eharaelers moving
slowly mighl be able lO sneak pasl enemies lhal c1umsier
eharaelers would alerl. A rogue and a monk moving at a slow
paee are mueh harder to deteel when lhey leave lheir dwarf
paladin friend behind.
...•--------------------- ..•.
For example, a ereature with a Constitution of 14 ean
hold its breath for 3 minutes. If it starts suffoeating. it
has 2 rounds to reaeh air before it drops to Ohit points.
VISION AND LIGHT
The most fundamental tasks of adventuring-noticing
danger, finding hidden objeets, hitting an enemy in
eombat, and targeting a spell, to name just a few-
rely heavily on a eharaeter's ability to see. Darkness
and other effeets that obseure vision can prove a
signifieant hindranee.
A given area might be Iightly or heavily obseured. In
a Iightly obscured area, sueh as dim light, patehy fog,
or moderate foliage, ereatures have disadvantage on
Wisdom (Pereeption) eheeks that rely on sight.
A heavi1y obscured area-sueh as darkness, opaque
fog, or dense foliage-bloeks vision entireIy. A ereature
in a heavily obseured area effeetively suffers from the
blinded eondition (see appendix A).
The presenee or absenee of Iight in an environment
ereates three eategories of illumination: bright Iight, dim
Iight, and darkness.
Bright Iight lets most ereatures see normally. Even
gloomy days provide bright light, as do torehes, lanterns,
fires, and other sourees of illumination within a
specifie radius.
Dim Iight, also ealled shadows, ereates a Iightly
obseured area. An area of dim Iight is usually a
boundary between a souree of bright Iight, sueh as
a toreh, and surrounding darkness. The soft Iight
of twilight and dawn also eounts as dim Iight. A
particularly brilliant full moon might bathe the land
in dim Iight.
Darkness ereates a heavily obseured area. Charaeters
face darkness outdoors at night (even most moonlit
nights). within the confines of an unlit dungeon or a
subterranean vault, or in an area of magieal darkness.
BLlNDSIGHT
A ereature with blindsight ean pereeive its surroundings
without relying on sight, within a specifie radius.
Creatures without eyes, sue h as oozes, and ereatures
with eeholoeation or heightened senses, sueh as bats
and true dragons, have this sense.
DARKVISION
Many ereatures in the worlds of O&D, espeeially those
that dwell underground. have darkvision. Within a
specified range, a ereature with darkvision ean see in
PART 2IADVEN""l URING
darkness as if the darkness were dim light, so areas
of darkness are only lightly obscured as far as that
creature is concerned. However, the creature can't
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
TRUESIGHT
Acreature with truesight can, out to a specific range,
see in normal and magical darkness, see invisible
creatures and objects, automatically detect visual
illusions and succeed on saving throws against them,
and perceives the original form of a shapechanger or
a creature that is transformed by magic. Furthermore,
the creature can see into the Ethereal Plane.
FOOD AND WATER
Characters who don't eat or drink suffer the effects of
exhaustion (see appendix A).Exhaustion caused by lack
of food or water can't be removed until the character
eats and drinks the full required amount.
FOOD
Acharacter needs one pound of food per day and can
make food last longer bysubsisting on half rations.
Eating half a pound of food in a day counts as half a day
without food.
Acharacter can go without food for a number of days
equal to 3 +his or her Constitution modifier (minimum
I). At the end of each day beyond that limit, a character
automatically suffers one levei ofexhaustion.
Anormal day ofeating resets the count ofdays
without food to zero.
WATER
Acharacter needs one gallon ofwater per day, or two
gallons per day if the weather is hot. Acharacter who
drinks only half that much water must succeed on a
DC 15 Constitution saving throw or suffer one leveI of
exhaustion at the end of the day.Acharacter with access
to even Icss watcr automatically suffers one levei of
exhaustion at the end of the day.
Ifthe character already has one or more leveis of
exhaustion, the character takes two leveis in either case.
INTERACTING WITH OBJECTS
Acharacter's interaction with objects in an environment
is often simple to resolve in the game. The player tells
the DM that his or her character is doing something,
such a moving a lever, and the DMdescribes what, if
anything happens.
For example, a character might decide to pull a lever,
which might, in turn, raise a portcullis, cause a room to
fiood with water, or open a secret door in a nearby wall.
Ifthe lever is rusted in position, though, a character
might need to force it. In such a situation, the DM might
call for a Strength check to see whether the character
can wrench the lever into place. The DM sets the DC for
any such check based on the difficulty of the task.
Characters can also damage objects with their
weapons and spells. Objects are immune to poison and
psychic damage, but otherwise they can be affected
by physical and magical attacks much like creaturescanoThe DM determines an object's Armor Class and
hit points, and might decide that certain objects have
resistance or immunity to certain kinds of attacks. (lt's
hard to cut a rope with a club, for example.) Objects
always fail Strength and Dexterity saving throws, and
they are immune to effects that require other saves.
When an object drops to Ohit points, it breaks.
Acharacter can also attempt a Strength check to
break an object. The DM sets the DC for any such check.
SOCIAL INTERACTION
Exploring dungeons, overcoming obstacles, and slaying
monsters are key parts of D&D adventures. No less
important, though, are the social interactions that
adventurers have with other inhabitants of the world.
Interaction takes on many forms. Vou might need
to convince an unscrupulous thief to confess to some
malfeasance, or you might try to fialter a dragon so that
itwill spare your life. The DM assumes the roles of any
characters who are participating in the interaction that
don't belong to another player at the table. Any such
character is called a nonplayer character (NPC).
In general terms, an NPC's altitude toward you is
described as friendly, indifferent, or hostile. Friendly
NPCs are predisposed to help you, and hostile ones are
inclined to get in your way. It's easier to get what you
want from a friendly NPC, of course.
Social interactions have two primary aspects:
roleplaying and ability checks.
ROLEPLAYING
Roleplaying is, literally, the act ofplaying out a role.
In this case, it'syouas a player determining how your
character thinks, acts, and talks.
Roleplaying is a part of every aspect of the game,
and it comes to the fore during social interactions.
Your character's quirks, mannerisms, and personality
infiuence how interactions resolve.
There are two styles you can use when roleplaying
your character: the descriptive approach and the active
approach. Most players use a combination of the two
styles. Use whichever mix of the two works best for YOU.
DESCRIPTIVE ApPROACH TO ROLEPLAYING
With this approach, you describe your character's words
and actions to the DMand the other players. Drawing on
your mental image ofyour character, you tell everyone
what your character does and how he or she does it.
For instance, Chris plays Tordek the dwarf. Tordek
has a quick temper and blames the elves of the
Cloakwood for his family's misfortune. At a tavern. an
obnoxious elf minstrel sits at Tordek's table and tries to
strike up a conversation with the dwarf.
Chris says, "Tordek spits on the fioor, growls an
insult at the bard, and stomps over to the bar. He sits
on a stool and glares at the minstrei before ordering
another drink."
In this example, Chris has conveyed Tordek's mood
and given the DM a clear idca of his character's
altitude and actions.
PARr:.:<\DVL Tl;RI NG
18
5
186When using descriptive roleplaying, keep the
following things inmind:
Describe yourcharacter's emotions andaltitude.
Focus onyourcharacter's intent and howothers
might perceive it.
Provide asmuch embellishment asyoufeel
comfortable with.
Don'tworry about getting things exactly right.Just
focusonthinking about whatyourcharacter would do
and describing whatyousee inyourmind.
ACTIVE ApPROACH TO ROLEPLAYING
Ifdescriptive roleplaying teUsyour DMandyourfellow
players whatyourcharacter thinks anddoes, active
roleplaying showsthem.
Whenyouuseactiveroleplaying,youspeak withyour
character's voice,likeanactortaking onarole.Voumight
evenechoyourcharacter's movements andbodylanguage.
This approach ismore immersive than descriptive
roleplaying, though youstillneed todescribe things
that can't bereasonably acted out.
Going backtotheexample ofChris roleplaying Tordek
above,here's howthescene might playoutifChris used
active roleplaying:
Speaking asTordek, Chris says inagruff,deepvoice,
"Iwas wondering whyitsuddenly smelled awful inhere.
IfIwanted tohear anything outofyou,l'dsnapyour
arm and enjoyyourscreams." Inhisnormal voice,Chris
then adds, "Igetup,glare attheelf,andhead tothebar."
RESULTS OFROLEPLAYING
The DMuses yourcharacter's actions andattitudes to
determine howanNPC reacts. Acowardly NPC buckles
under threats ofviolence. Astubborn dwarf refuses to
letanyone badger her.Avaindragon lapsupf1attery.
When interacting withanNPC, payclose attention to
the DM'sportrayal oftheNPC's mood, dialogue, and
personality. Voumight beabletodetermine anNPC's
personality traits, ideais, f1aws,and bonds, then playon
them toinfluence theNPC's attitude.
Interactions in0&0 are much likeinteractions in
reallife. Ifyou can offerNPCs something theywant,
threaten them with something theyfear,orplayontheir
sympathies andgoals,youcan usewords togetalmost
anything youwant. Ontheother hand, ifyouinsult a
proud warrior orspeak illofanoble's allies, yourefforts
toconvince ordeceive willfalishort.
ABILITY CHECKS
Inaddition toroleplaying, abilitychecks are keyin
determining theoutcome ofaninteraction.
Yourroleplaying efforts can alter anNPC's altitude,
butthere might stillbeanelement ofchance inthe
situation. Forexample, your DMcancallforaCharisma
check atanypoint during aninteraction ifheorshe
wants thedicetoplayaroleindetermining anNPC's
reactions. Other checks might beappropriate incertain
situations, atyour DM'sdiscretion.
Payattention toyourskillproficiencies when thinking
ofhowyouwant tointeract withanNPC, andstack
thedeck inyourfavorbyusing anapproach that relies
PART2IADVENTURINGonyourbest bonuses and skills. Ifthegroup needs to
trickaguard intoletting them intoacastle, therogue
whoisproficient inDeception isthebest bettoleadthe
discussion. When negotiating forahostage's release,
thecleric withPersuasion should domost ofthetalking.
RESTING
Heroic though theymight be,adventurers can't spend
everyhour ofthedayinthethickofexploration, social
interaction, and combatoTheyneed rest-time to
sleep and eat,tend their wounds, refresh their minds
and spirits forspellcasting, andbrace themselves for
further adventure.
Adventurers can take short rests inthemidst ofan
adventuring dayandalongrest toendtheday.
SHORT REST
Ashort rest isaperiod ofdowntime, atleast Ihour long,
during which acharacter does nothing more strenuous
than eating, drinking, reading, andtending towounds.
Acharacter can spend oneormore HitDiceattheend
ofashort rest, uptothecharacter's maximum number
ofHitDice,which isequal tothecharacter's leveI.For
each HitDiespent inthisway,the playerrollsthedie
and adds thecharacter's Constitution modifier toit.The
character regains hitpoints equal tothetotal.The player
can decide tospend anadditional HitDieafter each roll.
Acharacter regains some spent HitDiceupon finishing
alongrest, asexplained below.
LONG REST
Alongrest isaperiod ofextended downtime, atleast 8
hours long,during which acharacter sleeps orperforms
lightactivity:reading, talking, eating, orstanding watch
fornomore than 2hours. Iftherest isinterrupted bya
period ofstrenuous activity-at least 1hour ofwalking,
fighting, casting spells, orsimilar adventuring activity-
thecharacters must begin therest again togainany
benefit fromit.
Attheendofalongrest, acharacter regains alllost
hitpoints. Thecharacter also regains spent HitDice,up
toanumber ofdiceequal tohalfofthecharacter's total
number ofthem. Forexample, ifacharacter haseight
HitDice,heorshecan regain fourspent HitDiceupon
finishing alongresto
Acharacter can't benefit frommore than onelongrest
ina24-hour period, and acharacter must haveatleast
1hitpoint atthestart oftherest togainitsbenefits.
BETWEEN AnVENTURES
Between trips todungeons and battles against ancient
evils,adventurers need time torest, recuperate, and
prepare fortheir nextadventure. Manyadventurers also
usethis time toperform other tasks, suchascrafting
arms and armor, performing research, orspending
their hard-earned gold.
Insome cases, thepassage oftime issomething that
occurs with littlefanfare ordescription. When starting
anewadventure, the DMmight simplydeclare thata
certain amount oftime has passed andallowyou to
describe in general terms what your character has
been doing. At other times, the DM might want to keep
track ofjust how much time is passing as events beyond
your perception stay in motion.
LIFESTYLE EXPENSES
Between adventures, you choose a particular quality
of !ifeand pay the cost of maintaining that lifestyle, as
described in chapter 5.
Living a particular lifestyle doesn't have a huge effect
on your character, but your lifestyle can affect the way
other individuais and groups react to you. For example,
when you lead an aristocratic lifestyle, it might be easier
for you to influence the nobles of the city than ifyou
live in poverty.
DOWNTIME ACTIVITIES
Between adventures, the DM might ask you what your
character is doing during his or her downtime. Periods
of downtime can vary in duration, but each downtime
activity requires a certain number of days to complete
before you gain any benefit, and at least 8 hours ofeach
day must be spent on the downtime activity for the day
to count. The days do not need to be consecutive. Iryou
have more than the minimum amount of days to spend,
you can keep doing the same thing for a longer period
of time, or switch to a new downtime activity.
Downtime activities other than the ones presented
below are possible. Ifyou want your character to spend
his or her downtime performing an activity not covered
here, discuss itwith your DM.
CRAFTING
Voucan craft nonmagical objects, including adventuring
equipment and works of art. Voumust be proficient
with tools related to the object you are trying to create
(typically artisan's tools). Voumight also need aeeess to
special materiais or locations necessary to create it. For
example, someone proficient with smith's tools needs a
forge in order to craft a sword or suit ofarmor.
For every day ofdowntime you spend crafting, you
can craft one or more items with a total market value
not exceeding 5 gp, and you must expend raw materiaIs
worth half the total market value. Irsomething you
want to craft has a market value greater than 5 gp, you
make progress every day in 5-gp increments until you
reach the market value of the item. For example, a suit
of plate armor (market value 1,500 gp) takes 300 days
to craft byyourself.
Multiple characters can combine their efforts toward
the crafting ofa single item, provided that the characters
ali have proficiency with the requisite tools and are
working together in the same place. Each character
contributes 5 gp worth of effort for every day spent
helping to craft the item. For example, three characters
with the requisite to 01proficiency and the proper
facilities can craft a suit of plate armor in 100 days,
at a total cost of 750 gp.
While crafting. you can maintain a modest !ifestyle
without having to pay 1gp per day.or a comfortable
lifestyle at half the normal cost (see chapter 5 for more
information on lifestyle expenses).PRACTICING A PROFESSION
Voucan work between adventures. allowing you to
maintain a modest lifestyle without having to pay 1gp
per day (see chapter 5 for more information on lifestyle
expenses). This benefit lasts as long you continue to
practice your profession.
Iryou are a member of an organization that can
provide gainful employment, such as a tempIe or a
thieves' guild. you earo enough to support a comfortable
lifestyle instead.
Iryou have proficiency in the Performance skill and
put your performance skill to use during your downtime,
you earn enough to support a wealthy !ifestyle instead.
RECUPERATING
Voucan use downtime between adventures to recover
from a debilitating injury, disease, or poison.
After three days of downtime spent recuperating,
you can make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw.
On a successful save, you can choose one of the
following results:
End one effect on you that prevents you from regain-
ing hit points.
For the next 24 hours, gain advantage on saving
throws against one disease or poison currently
affecting YOU.
RESEARCHING
The time between adventures is a great chance to
perform research, gaining insight into mysteries
that have unfurled over the course of the campaign.
Research can include poring over dusty tomes and
crumbling scrolls in a library or buying drinks for the
locais to pry rumors and gossip from their lips.
When you begin your research, the DM determines
whether the information is available, how many days of
downtime itwill take to find it, and whether there are
any restrictions on your research (such as needing to
seek out a specific individual, tome. or location). The
DM might also require you to make one or more ability
checks. such as an Intelligence (Investigation) check
to find clues pointing toward the information you seek.
or a Charisma (Persuasion) check to secure someone's
aid. Once those conditions are met, you learn the
information ifit is available.
For each day of research. you must spend 1gp to
cover your expenses. This cost is in addition to your
normallifestyle expenses (as discussed in chapter 5).
TRAINING
Voucan spend time between adventures learning a new
language or training with a set oftooIs. Your DM might
allow additional training options.
First, you must find an instructor willing to teach you.
The DMdetermines how long it takes. and whether one
or more ability checks are required.
The training lasts for 250 days and eosts 1gp per day.
After you spend the requisite amount of time and money,
you learn the new language or gain proficieney with
the new tool.
PART2I'\OVENTURI. 'G
••CHAPTER9:COMBAT
HECLATTER OFASWORDSTRIKING AGAINST
ashield. The terrible rending sound as
monstrous claws tear through armor. A
brilliant flash oflight as a ball off1ame
blossoms from awizard's spell. The sharp
tang ofblood in the air, cutting through
the stench ofvile monsters. Roars offury,
shouts oftriumph, cries ofpain. Combat in 0&0can be
chaotic, deadly, and thrilling.
This chapter provides the rules you need foryour
characters and monsters toengage incombat, whether
itisabrief skirmish or an extended conflict ina
dungeon or on afieldofbattle. Throughout this chapter,
the rules address you, the player or Dungeon Master.
The Dungeon Master controls ali the monsters and
nonplayer characters involved incombat, and each other
player controls an adventurer. "You"can also mean the
character or monster that you control.
THE ORDER OF COMBAT
Atypical combat encounter isaclash between two
sides, a f1urryofweapon swings, feints, parries,
footwork, and spellcasting. The game organizes the
chaos ofcombat into acycle ofrounds and turns. A
round represents about 6seconds inthe game world.
During a round, each participant inabattle takes a
turno The order ofturns isdetermined at the beginning
ofacombat encounter, when everyone rolls initiative.
Once everyone has taken a turn, the fight continues to
the next round ifneither side has defeated the other.
SURPRISE
Aband ofadventurers sneaks upon abandit camp,
springing from the trees toattack them. Agelatinous
cube glides down adungeon passage, unnoticed by
the adventurers until the cube engulfs one ofthem. In
these situations, one side ofthe battle gains surprise
over the other.
The DMdetermines who might be surprised. If
neither side tries tobe stealthy, they automatically notice
each other. Otherwise, the DMcompares the Dexterity
(Stealth) checks ofanyone hiding with the passive
Wisdom (Perception) score ofeach creature on the
•••
COMBAT STEP BY STEP
1.Delerminesurprise.TheDMdelermineswhelheranyone
involvedinlhecombalencounlerissurprised.
2.Eslablishposilions.TheDMdecideswherealilhe
characlersandmonslersarelocaled.Givenlhe
advenlurers'marchingarderarlheirslaled posilionsin
lheroamarolherlocalion,lheDMfiguresoulwherelhe
adversariesare-how farawayandinwhaldireclion.
3.RolIinilialive.Everyoneinvolvedinlhecombalencounler
rollsinilialive,delermininglhearderofcombalanls' lurns.
4.Takelurns. Eachparlicipanlinlheballlelakesalum in
initiative arder.
5.Beginlhenexlround.Wheneveryoneinvolvedinlhe
combalhashadalurn,lheroundends. Repealslep4unlil
lhefighlingslops.....• r----------------------~,.-opposing side. Anycharacter or monster that doesn't
notice athreat issurprised at the start ofthe encounter.
Ifyou're surprised, you can't move or take an aclion
onyour first turn ofthe combat, and you can't take a
reaction until that turn ends. Amember ofagroup can
be surprised even ifthe other members aren't.
INITIATIVE
Initiative determines the order ofturns during combat.
When combat starts, every participant makes a
Dexterity check lOdetermine their place in the initiative
order. The DMmakes one rollforan entire group of
identical creatures, so each member ofthe group acts at
the same time.
The DMranks the combatants inorder from the one
with the highest Dexterity check total tothe one with
the lowest. This is the order (called the initiative order)
inwhich they act during each round. The initiative order
remains the same from round toround.
Ifatie occurs, the DMdecides the order among
tied DM-controlled creatures, and the players decide
the order among their tied characters. The DMcan
decide the order ifthe tie isbetween amonster and a
player character. Optionally, the DMcan have the tied
characters and monsters each roll ad20 todetermine
the order, highest roll going first.
YOUR TURN
Onyour turn, you can move adistance up toyour speed
and take one aetion. Voudecide whether tomove first
or take your action first. Yourspeed-sometimes ealled
your walking speed-is noted onyour eharacter sheet.
The most common actions you can take are described
in the "Actions in Combat" section later in this chapter.
Many class features and other abilities provide
additional options foryour action.
The "Movement and Position" section later inthis
chapter gives the rules foryour move.
Voucan forgo moving, taking an action, or doing
anything at ali onyour turn.lfyou can't decide what to
doonyour turn, consider taking the Dodge or Ready
action, as described in"Actions inCombat."
BONUS ACTIONS
Various class features, spells, and other abilities letyou
take an additional action onyour turn called abonus
action. The Cunning Action feature, forexample, allows
a rogue totake abonus action. Voucan take a bonus
action onlywhen a special ability, spell, or other feature
ofthe game states that you can dosomething as abonus
action. Vouotherwise don't have abonus action totake.
Voucan take only one bonus action onyour turn, so
you must choose which bonus action touse when you
have more than one available.
Vouchoose when totake abonus action during your
turn, unless the bonlls action's timing isspecified, and
anything that deprives you ofyour ability to take actions
also prevents you from taking a bonus action.
PART 2ICOMBAT
REACTIONS
MOVEMENT AND POSITIONCertain special abilities, spells, and situations allow
you totake aspecial action called areaction. Areaction
isan instant response toatrigger ofsome kind, which
can occur onyour turn ar on someone else's. The
opportunity attack, described later inthis chapter, isthe
most common type ofreaction.
When you take areaction, you can't take another one
until the start ofyour next turnoIfthe reaction interrupts
another creature's turn, that creature can continue its
turn right after the reaction.OTHER ACTI VITY ON YOUR TuRN
Yourturn can include avariety off10urishes that require
neither your action nor your move.
Voucan communicate however you are abIe, through
brief utterances and gestures, as you take your turno
Voucan also interact with one object ar feature ofthe
enviranment forfree, during either your move ar your
action. For example. youcould open adoar during your
move as you stride toward afoe,aryou could draw your
weapon as part ofthe same action you use toattack.
Ifyou want tointeract with asecond object, you need
touse your action. Some magic items and other special
objects always require an action touse, as stated
intheir descriptions.
The DMmight require you touse an action forany
ofthese activities when itneeds special care ar when it
presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the DM
could reasonably expect you touse an action toopen a
stuck doar ar turn acrank tolower adrawbridge.Voucan break upyour movement onyour turn, using
some ofyour speed before and after your action. For
example, ifyou have aspeed of 30feet,you can move
10feet, take your action, and then move 20 feel.
DIFFICULT TERRAIN
Combatants often findthemselves Iyingon the ground,
either because they are knocked down ar because they
thraw themselves down. In the game, they are prane,
acondition described inappendix A.
Voucan drop prone without using anyofyour
speed. Standing up takes more effort; doing so costsBEING PRONEUSING DIFFERENT SPEEDS
Ifyou have more than one speed, such as your walking
speed and af1yingspeed, you can switch back and forth
between your speeds during your move. Whenever you
switch, subtract the distance you've already moved fram
the new speed. The result determines how much farther
you can move. Ifthe result is Oar less. you can't use the
new speed during the current move.
For example, ifyou have aspeed of30 and aflying
speed of60 because awizard cast the flyspell onyou,
you could fly 20feet, then walk 10feet,and then leap
into the air tofly30 feet more.BREAKINGDpYOUR MOVE
MOVING BETWEEN ATTACKS
Ifyou take an action that includes more than one
weapon attack, you can break upyour movement even
further bymoving between those attacks. For example,
afighter who can make two attacks with the Extra
Attack feature and who has aspeed of25 feet could
move10feet, make an attack, move 15feet, and then
attack again.Onyour turn, you can move adistance up toyour
speed. Voucan use as much ar as little ofyour speed as
you Iikeonyour turn, following the rules here.
Yourmovement can includejumping, c1imbing, and
swimming. These different modes ofmovement can
be combined with walking, ar they can constitute your
entire move. However you're moving, you deduct the
distance ofeach part ofyour move fram your speed until
itisused upar until you are dane moving.
The "Special Types ofMovement" section in
chapter 8gives the particulars forjumping, c1imbing,
and swimming.
Combat rarely takes place inbare rooms or on
featureless plains. Boulder-strewn caverns, briar-
choked forests, treacherous staircases-the setting of
atypical fightcontains difficult terrain.
Every footofmovement indifficult terrain costs 1
extra fool.This ruIe istrue even ifmultiple things in
aspace count as difficult terrain.
Low furniture, rubble, undergrawth, steep stairs,
snow, and shallow bogs are examples ofdifficult terrain.
The space ofanother creature, whether hostile or not,
also counts as difficult terrain.
,.••
INTERACTlNG WITH OBIECTS AROUND Vou
Here are afew examples of the sorts ofthing you can do in
tandem with your movement and action:
draw or sheathe a sword
open or close a door
withdrawa potion fram your backpack
pick up a dropped axe
take a bauble from a table
remove a ring fram your finger
stuff some food into your mouth
plant a banner in the ground
fish a few coins from your belt pouch
drink ali the ale in a lIagon
throwa lever or a switch
pull a torch fram a sconce
take a book from a shelf you can reach
extinguish a small liame
don a mask
pull the hood ofyour c10ak up and overyour head
put your ear to a door
kick a small stone
tum a key in a lock
tap the lIoor with a 10.foot pole
hand an item to another character•••••Incombatocharacters and monsters are inconstant
motion, often using movement and position togain
the upper hand.
19°PART 2ICOMBAT
SIZE CATEGORIESCREATURE SIZEFLYING MOVEMENT
Space
2'/2by2'1,fI.
5 by Sfl.
SbySft.
10by 10ft.
lSbylSft.
20by20 ft. or largerSize
Tiny
Small
Medium
Large
Huge
GargantuanEach creature takes up a different amount ofspace.
The Size Categories table shows how much space
a creature ofa particular size controls in combal.
Objects sometimes use the same size categories.an amount ofmovement equal to half your speed. For •.•
example, ifyour speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15feet
ofmovement to stand up. Voucan't stand up ifyou don't
have enough movement left or ifyour speed is O.
To move while prone, you must crawl or use magic
such as teleportation. Every foot ofmovement while
crawling costs 1extra fool. Crawling 1foot in difficult
terrain, therefore, costs 3 feet ofmovement.
Voucan move through a nonhostile creature's space.
Incontrast, you can move through a hostile creature's
space only ifthe creature is at least two sizes larger or
smaller than you. Remember that another creature's
space is difficult terrain foryou.
Whether a creature is a friend or an enemy, you can't
willingly end your move in its space.
lfyou leave a hostile creature's reach during your
move, you provoke an opportunity attack, as explained
later in the chapter.MOVING AROUND OTHER
CREATURES
Flying creatures enjoy many benetits ofmobility, but
they must also deal with the danger offalling. lf a flying
creature is knocked prone, has its speed reduced to à,or
is otherwise deprived ofthe ability to move, the creature
falls, unless ithas the ability to hover or it is being held
aloft bymagic, such as bythe flyspell.
SPACE
Acreature's space is the area in feet that iteffectively
controls in combat, not an expression ofits physical
dimensions. Atypical Medium creature isn't 5 feet
wide, for example, but itdoes control a space that
wide. lf a Medium hobgoblin stands in a 5-foot-wide
doorway, other creatures can't get through unless the
hobgoblin lets them.
Acreature's space also reflects the area itneeds to
tight effeetively. For that reason, there's a limit to lhe
number ofereatures that can surround another creature
in combal. Assuming Medium combatants, eight
creatures can tit in a 5-foot radius around another one.
Because larger creatures take up more space, fewer
ofthem can surround a creature. Iftive Large creatures
4 •
VARIANT: PLAYING ON A CRIO
Ifyou play oul a combat using a square grid and minialures
ar olher lokens, follow lhese rules.
Squares. Each square on lhe grid represents 5 feel.
Speed. Ralher lhan moving fool by fool, move square by
square on lhe grid. This means you use your speed in 5.foot
segments. This is particularly easy if you lranslate your speed
inlo squares by dividing the speed by 5. For example, a speed
of 30 feel lranslales inlo a speed of 6 squares.
Ifyou use a grid often, consider wriling your speed in
squares on your characler sheel.
Enlering a Square. To enler a square, you musl have
ai leasl 1 square of movement left, even if lhe square is
diagonally adjacenl lo lhe square you're in. (The rule for
diagonal movemenl sacrifices realism for lhe sake of smoolh
play.The Dungeon Mas!er's Cuide provides guidance on using
a more realislic approach.)
Ifa square cosls exlra movemenl, as a square of diflicult
lerrain does, you musl have enough movemenl lefl lo pay for
enlering it. For example, you musl have ai leasl 2 squares of
movemenl lefl lo enler a square of diflicull lerrain.
Corners. Diagonal movemenl can'l cross lhe comer of a
wall, large lree, ar olher lerrain fealure lhal fills its space.
Ranges. To delermine the range on a grid belween two
lhings-whelher crealures ar objecls-start counling squares
from a square adjacent lo one of lhem and slop counling in
lhe space of the olher one. Counl by lhe shortesl raule.
~ ~
crowd around a Medium or smaller one, there's little
room for anyone else. In contrast, as many as twenty
Medium creatures can surround a Gargantuan one.
SQUEEZING INTO A SMALLER SPACE
A crealure can squeeze lhrough a space that is large
enough for a creature one size smaller than il. Thus, a
Large creature can squeeze through a passage that's
only 5 feet wide. While squeezing through a space,
a creature must spend 1 extra foot for every foot it
moves there, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls
and Dexlerily saving throws. Attack rolls against the
creature have advantage while it's in the smaller space.
ACTIONS IN COMBAT
When you take your action on your turn, you can take
one of the actions presented here, an action you gained
from your class or a special feature, or an action that
you improvise. Many monsters have action options of
their own in their stat blocks.
When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere
in the roles, the DM tells you whether that action is
possible and what kind of roll you need to make, if any,
to determine success or failure.
ATTACK
The most common action to take in combat is the Attack
action, whether you are swinging a sword, Iiring an
arrow fram a bow, or brawling with your fists.
With this action, you make one melee or ranged
attack. See the "Making an Attack" section for the rules
that govern attacks.
Certa in features, such as the Extra Attack feature
of the Iighter, allow you to make more than one attack
with this action.
PART 2ICOMBATCAST A SPELL
Spellcasters such as wizards and clerics, as well as
many monsters, have access to spells and can use
them to great effect in combal. Each spell has a casting
time, which specilies whether the caster must use an
action, a reaction, minutes, or even hours to cast the
spell. Casting a spell is, therefore, not necessarily an
action. Most spells do have a casting time of 1 action,
so a spellcaster often uses his or her action in combat
to cast such a spell. See chapter 10 for the rules
on spellcasting.
DASH
When you take the Dash action, you gain extra
movement for the current turn. The increase equals
your speed, after applying any modiliers. With a speed
of 30 feet, for example, you can move up to 60 feet on your
turn ifyou dash.
Any increase or decrease to your speed changes this
additional movement by the same amounl. lf your speed
of 30 feet is reduced to 15 feet, for instance, you can
move up to 30 feel this turn if you dash.
DISENGAGE
lfyou take the Disengage action, your movement doesn't
provoke opportunity attacks for the rest of the turn.
DODGE
When you take the Dodge action, you focus entirely on
avoiding attacks. Until the start of your next turn, any
attack roll made againsl you has disadvantage ifyou
can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity saving
throws with advantage. Vou lose this benelit if you are
incapacitated (as explained in appendix A) or if your
speed drops to O.
HELP
Vou can lend your aid to another creature in the
completion of a task. When you take the Help action,
the creature you aid gains advantage on the next ability
check it makes to perform the task you are helping with,
provided that it makes the check before the start of
your next turno
Alternatively, you can aid a friendly creature in
attacking a creature within 5 feet of you. Vou feint,
distract the target, or in some other way team up to
make your ally's attack more effective. lf your ally
attacks the target before your next turn, the Iirst attack
roll is made with advantage.
HIDE
When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity
(Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the rules
in chapter 7 for hiding. lfyou succeed, you gain certain
benelits, as described in the "Unseen Attackers and
Targets" section later in this chapter.
4 ,
IMPROVISING AN ACTION
Your character can do things not covered bythe actions in
this chapter, such as breaking down doors, intimidating
enemies, sensing weaknesses in magical defenses, or calling
for a parley with a foe. The only limits to the actions you can
attempt are your imagination and your character's ability
scores. See the descriptions of the ability scores in chapter 7
for inspiration as you improvise.
When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere in
the rules, the DM tells you whether that action is possible
and what kind of roll you need to make, ifany, to determine
success ar failure.
~ r
READY
Sometimes youwant toget thejump on afoeorwait for
aparticular circumstance before you act. Todoso,you
can take lhe Ready action onyour turn so that you can
act later inthe round using your reaction.
First, you decide what perceivable circumstance
will trigger your reaction. Then, you choose lhe action
you will take inresponse tothat trigger, oryou choose
tomove uptoyour speed inresponse toit.Examples
include "lf lhe cultist steps on the trapdoor, 1'11pull the
lever that opens it,"and "Ifthe goblin steps next tome,
Imove away."
When the lrigger occurs, you can either take your
reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore
the trigger. Remember that you can take onlyone
reaction per round.
When you ready aspell, you cast itas normal but
hold itsenergy, which you release with your reaction
when the trigger occurs. Tobe readied, aspell must'
have acasting time of 1action, and holding onto the
spell's magic requires concenlration (explained in
chapter 10).Ifyour concentration isbroken, the spell
dissipates without taking effect. For example, ifyou are
concentrating on the webspell and ready magic missiJe,
yourwebspell ends, and ifyou take damage before
you release magie missiJe with your reaction, your
concentration might bebroken.
SEARCH
When you take the Search action, you devote your
attention tofinding something. Depending on the
nature ofyour search, the DMmight haveyou make
aWisdom (Perception) check oran lntelligence
(Investigation) check.
USE AN OBJECT
Vounormally interact with an object while doing
something else, such as when you draw asword as part
ofan attack. When an object requires your action for
itsuse, you take the Use an Object action. This action
isalso useful when you want tointeract with more than
one object onyour turno
MAKING ANATTACK
Whether you're striking with amelee weapon, firing a
weapon aIrange, or making an attack rollas part ofa
spell, an attack has asimple structure.
1.Choose a target. Pick a target within your attack's
range: a creature, an object, ar a location.
2. Determine modifiers. The DMdetermines whether
the target has cover and whether you have advantage
ar disadvantage against the target. In addition, spel1s,
special abilities. and other effects can apply penalties
ar bonuses toyour attack rol1.
3. Resolve the attack. Voumake the attack roll. On a
hit, you rol1damage, unless the particular attack has
rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks cause
special effects in addition to ar instead ofdamage.
Ifthere's ever any question whether something you're
doing counts as an attack, the rule is simple: ifyou're
making an attack rol1,you're making an attack.
ATTACK ROLLS
When you make an attack, your attack roll determines
whether the attack hits ar misses. Tomake an attack
rol1,rol1a d20 and add the appropriate modifiers. lf the
total ofthe roll plus modifiers equals ar exceeds the
target's Armar Class (AC),the attack hits. The ACofa
character is determined at character creation. whereas
the ACofa monster is in its stat block.
MODIFIERS TO THE ROLL
When a character makes an attack rol1,the two most
common modifiers to the rol1are an ability modifier
and the character's proficiency bonus. When a monster
makes an attack roll, ituses whatever modifier is
provided in its stat block.
Ability Modifier. The ability modifier used fora melee
weapon attack is Strength, and the ability modifier used
fora ranged weapon attack is Dexterity. Weapons that
have the finesse ar thrown property break this rule.
Some spel1salso require an attack roll.The ability
modifier used for a spel1attack depends on the
spellcasting ability ofthe spel1caster, as explained
in chapter 10.
Proficiency Bonus. Vouadd your proficiency bonus
toyour attack rol1when you attack using a weapon with
which you have proficiency,as well as when you attack
with a spell.
ROLLING IOR20
Sometimes fate blesses ar curses a combatant, causing
the novice to hit and the veteran to miss.
Ifthe d20 rol1foran attack is a 20, the attack hits
regardless ofany modifiers ar the target's AC.In
addition, the attack is a criticai hit, as explained later
in this chapter.
Ifthe d20 roll for an attack is a I, the attack misses
regardless ofany modifiers ar the target's AC.
UNSEEN ATTACKERS AND TARGETS
Combatants often try toescape their foes' notice
byhiding, casting the invisibility spel1,ar lurking
in darkness.
When you attack a target that you can't see, you have
disadvantage on the attack roll. This is true whether
you're guessing the target's location ar you're targeting
a creature you can hear but not see. Ifthe target isn't in
the location you targeted, you automatically miss, but
the DM typically just says that the attack missed, not
whether you guessed the target's location correctly.
When a creature can't see you, you have advantage on
attack rolls against il.
lf you are hidden-both unseen and unheard-when
you make an attack, you give away your location when
the attack hits or misses.
RANGED ATTACKS
When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow or a
crossbow, huri a handaxe, or otherwise send projectiles
to strike a foe at a distance. A monster might shoot
spines from its taii. Many spells also involve making a
ranged atlack.
RANGE
Vou can make ranged attacks only against targets within
a specified range.
If a ranged attack, such as one made with a spell, has a
single range, you can't attack a target beyond this range.
Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a
longbow or a shortbow, have two ranges. The smaller
number is the normal range, and the larger number is
the long range. Your attack roll has disadvantage when
your target is beyond normal range, and you can't attack
a target beyond the long range.
RANGED ATTACKS IN CLOSE COMBAT
Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe
is next to you. When you make a ranged atlack with
a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have
disadvantage on the attack roll if you are within 5 feet
of a hostil e creature who can see you and who isn't
incapacitated.
MELEE ATTACKS
Used in hand-to-hand combat, a meIee atlack allows
you to attack a foe within your reach. A melee attack
typically uses a handheld weapon such as a sword,
a warhammer, or an axe. A typical monster makes a
melee attack when it strikes with its daws, horns, teeth,
tentades, or other body parI. A few spells also involve
making a mele e atlack.
Most creatures have a 5-foot reach and can thus
attack targets within 5 feet of them when making a
melee attack. Certain creatures (typically those larger
than Medium) have melee attacks with a greater reach
than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions.
When you are unarmed, you can fight in melee by
making an unarmed strike, as shown in the weapon
table in chapter 5.
OPPORTUNITY ATTACKS
In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for enemies
to drop their guardo Vou can rarely move heedlessly past
your foes without putting yourself in danger; doing so
provokes an opportunity attack.
Vou can make an opportunity attack when a hostile
creature that you can see moves out of your reach. To
make the opportunity attack, you use your reaction
to make one melee atlack against the provoking4 ,
CONTESTS IN COMBAT
Sattle often involves pítting your prowess against that of
your foe. Such a challenge is represented by a contes!. This
section includes the most common contests that require an
actíon in combat: grappling and shoving a creature. The DM
can use these contests as models for improvising others.
~ ~
creature. The atlack interrupts the provoking creature's
movement, occurring right before the creature
leaves your reach.
Vou can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by
taking the Disengage action. Vou also don't provoke an
opportunity attack when you teleport or when someone
or something moves you without using your movement,
action, or reaction. For example, you don't provoke an
opportunity atlack if an explosion huris you out of a foe's
reach or if gravity causes you to fall past an enemy.
TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING
When you take the Attack action and attack with a light
melee weapon that you're holding in one hand, you can
use a bonus action to atlack with a different light melee
weapon that you're holding in the other hand. Vou don't
add your ability modifier to the damage of the bonus
atlack, unless that modifier is negative.
If either weapon has the thrown property, you
can throw the weapon, instead of making a melee
atlack with il.
GRAPPLING
When you want to grab a creature or wrestle with it,
you can use the Attack action to make a special melee
attack, a grapple. If you're able to make multiple attacks
with the Atlack action, this atlack replaces one of them.
The target of your grapple must be no more than one
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach.
Using at least one free hand, you try to seize the target
by making a grapple check, a Strength (Athletics)
check contested by the target's Strength (Athletics) or
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (the target chooses the
ability to use). If you succeed, you subject the target to
the grappled condition (see appendix A). The condition
specifies the things that end it, and you can release the
target whenever you like (no action required).
Escaping aGrapple. A grappled creature can use its
action to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a Strength
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check contested by
your Strength (Athletics) check.
Moving aGrappled Creature. When you move, you
can drag or carry the grappled creature with you, but
your speed is halved, unless the creature is two or more
sizes smaller than you.
SHOVING A CREATURE
Using the Attack action, you can make a special melee
atlack to shove a creature, either to knock it prone or
push it away from you. Ifyou're able to make multiple
atlacks with the Attack action, this atlack replaces
one ofthem.
The target of your shove must bc no more than one
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach.
Vou make a Strength (Athletics) check contested by the
target's Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics)
PART2 1COMBA r
195
check (the target chooses the ability to use). Ifyou win
the contest, you either knock the target prone or push
it 5 feet away from you.
COVER
Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide
cover during combat, making a target more difficult
to harm. Atarget can benetit from cover only when an
attack or other effect originates on the opposite side
of the cover.
There are three degrees of cover. Ifa target is behind
multipIe sources of cover, only the most protective
degree of cover applies; the degrees aren't added
together. For example, if a target is behind a creature
that gives half cover and a tree trunk that gives three-
quarters cover, the target has three-quarters cover.
Atarget with half cover has a +2 bonus to AC and
Oexterity saving throws. A target has half cover ifan
obstacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle
might be a low wall. a large piece of furniture, a narrow
tree trunk, or a creature, whether that creature is an
enemy or a friend.
A target with three-quarters cover has a +5 bonus
to AC and Oexterity saving throws. A target has three-
quarters cover if about three-quarters of it is covered
by an obstacle. The obstacle might be a portcullis. an
arrow slit, or a thick tree trunk.
A target with total cover can't be targeted directly
by an attack or a spell, although some spells can reach
such a target by including it in an area of effect. A
target has total cover if it is completely concealed by
an obstacle.
DAMAGE AND HEALING
Injury and the risk of death are constant companions
of those who explore the worlds of 0&0. The thrust of
a sword. a well-placed arrow, or a blast of f1ame from a
firebaJl spell ali have the potential to damage. or even
kill. the hardiest of creatures.
HIT POINTS
Hit points represent a combination of physical and
mental durability. the will to live, and luck. Creatures
with more hit points are more difficult to kill. Those
with fewer hit points are more fragile.
Acreature's current hit points (usually just called hit
points) can be any number from the creature's hit point
maximum down to O.This number changes frequently
as a creature takes damage ar receives healing.
Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is
subtracted from its hit points. The loss of hit points has
no effect on a creature's capabilities until the creature
drops to Ohit points.
DAMAGE ROLLS
Each weapon. spell. and harmful monster ability
specifies the damage it deals. Vou roll the damage die
or dice, add any modifiers, and apply the damage to
your target. Magic weapons, special abilities, and other
factors can grant a bonus to damage.
PART2ICOMBATWhen attacking with a weapon. you add your ability
modifier-the same modifier used for the attack roll-
to the damage. Aspell tells you which dice to roll for
damage and whether to add any modifiers.
Ifa spell ar other effect deals damage to more than
one target at the same time, roll the damage once for
ali of them. For example, when a wizard casts firebaJl or
a cleric casts liame strike, the spell's damage is rolled
once for ali creatures caught in the blast.
CRITICAL HITS
When you score a criticai hit, you get to roll extra dice
for the attack's damage against the target. RolI ali of the
attack's damage dice twice and add them together. Then
add any relevant modifiers as normal. To speed up play.
you can roll ali the damage dice alonce.
For example, ifyou score a criticai hit with a dagger,
roll 2d4 for the damage, rather than Id4, and then add
your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves other
damage dice, such as from the rogue's Sneak Attack
feature, you roll those dice twice as well.
DAMAGE TYPES
Oifferent attacks. damaging spells, and other harmful
effects deal different types of damage. Oamage types
have no rules of their own, but other rules, such as
damage resistance, rely on the types.
The damage types follow, with examples to help a
DM assign a damage type to a new effect.
Acid.The corrosive spray of a black dragon's breath
and the dissolving enzymes secreted by a black pudding
deal acid damage.
Bludgeoning. Slunt force attacks-hammers. falling,
constriction. and the like-deal bludgeoning damage.
Cold.The infernal chill radiating from an ice devil's
spear and the frigid blast of a white dragon's breath
deal cold damage.
Fire.Red dragons breathe fire, and many spells
conjure f1ames to deal fire damage,
Force. Force is pure magical energy focused into a
damaging formoMost effects that deal force damage are
spells, including magic missile andspirituaJ weapon.
Lightning. AJightning bolt spell and a blue dragon's
breath deallightning damage.
Necrotic. Necrotic damage. dealt by certain undead
and a spell such as chilJ touch. withers matter and
even the soul.
Piercing. Puncturing and impaling attacks, including
spears and monsters' bites, deal piercing damage.
Poison. Venomous stings and the toxic gas of a green
dragon's breath deal poison damage.
Psychic. Mental abilities such as a mind f1ayer's
psionic blast deal psychic damage.
Radiant. Radiant damage. dealt bya cleric's liame
strikespell or an angel's smiting weapon, sears the f1esh
Iike fire and overloads the spirit with powcr.
Slashing. Swords. axes. and monsters' claws deal
slashing damage.
Thunder. A concussive burst of sound. such as the
effect of lhe thunderwave spell, deals lhunder damage.
•••
DAMAGE RESISTANCE AND
VULNERABILITY
Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult or
unusually easy tohurt with certain types ofdamage.
lfacreature or an object has resistance toadamage
type, damage ofthat type ishalved against it.Ifa
creature or an object has vulnerability toadamage
type, damage ofthat type isdoubled against it.
Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after
ali other modifiers todamage. For example, acreature
has resistance tobludgeoning damage and ishit byan
altack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature
isalso within amagical aura that reduces ali damage by
5.The 25 damage isfirst reduced by5and then halved,
so the creature takes 10damage.
Multiple instances ofresistance orvulnerability that
affect the same damage type count as onlyone instance.
For example, ifacreature has resistance tofiredamage
as wellas resistance toali nonmagical damage, the
damage ofanonmagical fireisreduced byhalf against
the creature, not reduced bythree-quarters.
HEALING
Unless itresults indeath, damage isn't permanent. Even
death isreversible through powerful magic. Rest can
restore acreature's hitpoints (as explained inchapter
8),and magical methods such as a cure wOllnds spell or
apotionofhealingcan remove damage inan instant.
When acreature receives healing ofany kind, hit
points regained are added toitscurrent hitpoints. A
creature's hit points can't exceed itshit point maximum,
so any hit points regained inexcess ofthis number are
lost. For example, adruid granls aranger 8hit points of
healing. Ifthe ranger has 14current hit points and has a
hit point maximum of20, the ranger regains 6hit points
from the druid, not 8.
Acreature that has died can't regain hit points until
magic such as the revivifyspell has restored ittolife.
DROPPING TO OHIT POINTS
When you drop to Ohit points, you either die outright or
faliunconscious, as explained inthe following sections.
INSTANT DEATH
Massive damage can killyou instantly. When damage
reduces you to Ohitpoints and there isdamage
remaining, you die ifthe remaining damage equals
or exceeds your hit point maximum.
Forexample, acleric with amaximum of
12hitpoints currently has 6hitpoints. Ifshe
takes 18damage from an attack, she isreduced
toOhit points, but 12damage remains. Because
the remaining damage equals her hitpoint
maximum, the cleric dies.
FALLING UNCONSCIOUS
lfdamage reduces you to Ohit points and fails tokill
you,you faliunconscious (see appendix A).This
unconsciousness ends ifyou regain any hit points."'"DESCRIBING THE EFFECTS OF DAMAGE
Dungeon Masters deseribe hit pointloss in different ways.
When your eurrent hit pointtotal is half or more of your hit
point maximum. you lypieally show no signs of injury. When
you drop below half your hit point maximum, you show signs
of wear, sueh aseuts and bruises. An attaek that reduees you
to Ohit points strikes you direetly, leaving ableeding injury or
other trauma, or it simply knoeks you uneonseious.
~ ~
DEATH SAVING THROWS
Whenever you start your tum with Ohit points, you
must make aspecial saving throw, called adeath saving
throw, todetermine whether you creep closer todeath
or hang onto life.Unlike other saving throws, this one
isn't tied toany ability score. Vouare inthe hands offate
now,aided onlybyspells and features that improve your
chances ofsucceeding on asaving throw.
Rollad20. Iflhe roll is 10or higher, you succeed.
Otherwise, you fai!'Asuccess or failure has noeffect
byitself.Onyour third success. youbecome stable (see
below).Onyour third failure, you die. The successes
and failures don't need tobeconsecutive; keep track
ofboth until you collect three ofakind. The number of
both isreset tozero when youregain anyhitpoints or
become stable.
Ro/ling1or 20.When you make adeath saving throw
and rolla 1on the d20, itcounts as two failures. lfyou
roll a20 on the d20, you regain 1hit point.
Damageat OHit Points. lfyou take any damage while
you haveOhit points, you suffer adeath saving throw
failure. Ifthe damage isfrom acriticai hit,you suffcr
two failures instead. lflhe damage equals or exceeds
your hit point maximum, you suffer instant death.
STABILIZING A CREATURE
The best way tosave acreature with Ohit points isto
heal it.Ifhealing isunavailable, the creature can at
least bestabilized sothat itisn't killedbyafaileddeath
saving throw.
Voucan use your action toadminister first aid toan
unconscious creature and altempt tostabilize it,which
requires asuccessful De10Wisdom (Medicine) check.
Astab1e creature doesn't make death saving throws,
even though ithas Ohit points, but itdoes remain
unconscious. The creature stops being stable, and must
start making death saving throws again, if it takes any
damage. A stable creature that isn't healed regains
I hit point after Id4 hours.
MONSTERS AND DEATH
Most DMs have a monster die the instant it drops to
Ohit points, rather than having it fali unconscious and
make death saving throws.
Mighty villains and special nonplayer characters
are common exceptions; the DM might have them
fali unconscious and follow the same rules as
player characters.
KNOCKING A CREATURE OUT
Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe,
rather than deal a killing blow. When an attacker
reduces a creature to Ohit points with a melee attack,
the attacker can knock the creature out. The attacker
can make this choice the instant the damage is dealt.
The creature falls unconscious and is stable.
TEMPORARY HIT POINTS
Some spells and special abilities confer temporary hit
points to a creature. Temporary hit points aren't actual
hit points: they are a buffer against damage, a pool of hit
points that protect you from injury.
When you have temporary hit points and take damage,
the temporary hit points are lost first, and any leftover
damage carries over to your normal hit points. For
example, ifyou have 5 temporary hit points and take
7 damage, you lose the temporary hit points and then
take 2 damage.
Because temporary hit points are separate from
your actual hit points, they can exceed your hit point
maximum. A character can, therefore, be at full hit
points and receive temporary hit points.
Healing can't restore temporary hit points, and they
can't be added together. Ifyou have temporary hit points
and receive more of them, you decide whether to keep
the ones you have or to gain the new ones. For example,
if a spell grants you 12 temporary hit points when you
already have lO,you can have 12 or lO, not 22.
lf you have Ohit points, receiving temporary hit points
doesn't restore you to consciousness or stabilize you.
They can still absorb damage directed at you while
you're in that state, but only true healing can save you.
Unless a feature that grants you temporary hit points
has a duration, they last until they're depleted or you
finish a long resto
MOUNTED COMBAT
A knight charging into battle on a warhorse, a wizard
casting spells from the back of a griffon, or a c1eric
soaring through the sky on a pegasus ali enjoy the
benefits of speed and mobility that a mount can provide.
A willing creature that is at least one size larger than
you and that has an appropriate anatomy can serve as a
mount, using the following rules.
PART 2ICOMBATMOUNTING AND DISMOUNTING
Once during your move, you can mount a creature that
is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs an
amount of movement equal to half your speed. For
example, ifyour speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15
feet of movement to mount a horse. Therefore, you can't
mount it ifyou don't have 15 feet of movement left or
ifyour speed is O.
If an effect moves your mount against its will while
you're on it,you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity
saving throw or fali off the mount, landing prone in a
space within 5 feet of it. Ifyou're knocked prone while
mounted, you must make the same saving throw.
1fyour mount is knocked prone, you can use your
reaction to dismount it as it falls and land on your feet.
Otherwise, you are dismounted and fali prone in a
space within 5 feet it.
CONTROLLING A MOUNT
While you're mounted, you have two options. Vou
can either control the mount or allow it to act
independently. Intelligent creatures, such as dragons,
act independently.
Vou can controI a mount only if it has been trained
to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, donkeys, and
similar creatures are assumed to have such training.
The initiative of a controlled mount changes to match
yours when you mount it. 1tmoves as you direct it, and
it has only three action options; Dash, Disengage, and
Dodge. A controlled mount can move and act even on
the turn that you mount it.
An independent mount retains its place in the
initiative order. Bearing a rider puts no restrictions on
the actions the mount can take, and it moves and acts
as it wishes. 1tmight flee from combat, rush to attack
and devour a badly injured foe, or otherwise act against
your wishes.
In either case, if the mount provokes an opportunity
attack while you're on it, the attacker can target you
or the mount.
UNDERWATER COMBAT
When adventurers pursue sahuagin back to their
undersea homes, fight offsharks in an ancient
shipwreck, or find themselves in a flooded dungeon
room, they must fight in a challenging environment.
Underwater the following rules apply.
When making a me1ee weapon attack, a creature
that doesn't have a swimming speed (either natural or
granted by magic) has disadvantage on the attack roll
unless the weapon is a dagger, javelin, shortsword,
spear, or trident.
A ranged weapon attack automatically misses
a target beyond the weapon's normal range. Even
against a target within normal range, the attack roll has
disadvantage unless the weapon is a crossbow, a net, or
a weapon that is thrown like a javelin (including a spear,
trident, or dart).
Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in
water have resistance to fire damage.
PARI3
The Rules af Magic .
PART 3 I Til E RULES OF MAGIC
CHAPTER 10:SPELLCASTING
AGIC PERMEATES THE WORLDS OF D&DAND
most often appears inthe form ofaspell.
This chapter provides the rules for
casting spells. Different character
classes have distinctive ways oflearning
and preparing their spells, and monsters
use spells inunique ways. Regardless ofitssource,
aspell follows the rules here.
WHAT1sA SPELL?
Aspell isadiscrete magical effect,asingle shaping
ofthe magical energies that suffuse the multiverse
into aspecific, limited expression. Incasting aspell,
acharacter carefully plucks atthe invisible strands of
raw magic suffusing the world, pins them inplace ina
particular pattern, sets them vibrating inaspecific way,
and then releases them tounleash the desired effect-in
most cases, ali inthe span ofseconds.
Spells can be versatile tools, weapons, orprotective
wards. They can deal damage orundo it,impose or
remove conditions (see appendix A),drain lifeenergy
away,and restore lifetothe dead.
Uncounted thousands ofspells have been created
over the course ofthe multiverse's history, and many of
them are long forgotten. Some might yet lierecorded in
crumbling spellbooks hidden inancient ruins ortrapped
inthe minds ofdead gods. Orthey might someday be
reinvented byacharacter who has amassed enough
power and wisdom todosO.
SPELL LEVEL
Everyspell has aleveifrom Oto9.Aspell's leveiisa
general indicator ofhow powerful itis.with the lowly
(but still impressive) magic missile at 1stleveiand
the earth-shaking wishat9th. Cantrips-simple but
powerful spells that characters can cast almost byrote-
are leveiO.The higher aspell's levei,the higher leveia
spellcaster must be touse that spell.
Spelllevel and character leveidon't correspond
directly. Typically,acharacter has tobe atleast 17th
levei,not 9th levei,tocast a9th-leveI spell.
KNOWN AND PREPARED SPELLS
Before aspellcaster can use aspell, heorshe must
have the spell firmly fixedinmind, ormust haveaccess
tothe spell inamagic item. Members ofafewclasses,
including bards and sorcerers, have alimited list of
spells they know that are always fixedinmind. The
same thing istrue ofmany magic-using monsters. Other
spellcasters, such as clerics and wizards, undergo a
process ofpreparing spells. This process varies for
different classes, as detailed intheir descriptions.
4 •
CASTING INARMOR
Because ofthe mental focus and precise gestures required
for spellcasting, you must be proncient with the armor you
are wearing to cast a spell. Vou are otherwise too distracted
and physically hampered byyour armor for spellcasting.
~ rInevery case, the number ofspells acaster can
have fixedinmind atany given time depends onthe
character's leveI.
SPELL SLOTS
Regardless ofhow many spells acaster knows or
prepares, heorshe can cast onlyalimited number of
spells before resting. Manipulating the fabric ofmagic
and channeling itsenergy into even asimple spell is
physically and mentally taxing, and higher-Ievel spells
are even more so. Thus, each spellcasting class's
description (except that ofthe warlock) includes atable
showing howmany spell slots ofeach spelllevel a
character can use ateach character leveI.For example,
the 3rd-level wizard Umara has four 1st-leveispell slots
and two 2nd-levei slots.
When acharacter casts aspell, heorshe expends
aslot ofthat spell's leveiorhigher, effectively "filling"
aslotwith the spell. Voucan think ofaspell slotas a
groove ofacertain size-small fora 1st-leveislot,larger
foraspell ofhigher leveI.A1st-leveispell fitsintoaslot
ofany size, but a9th-levei spell fitsonlyina9th-levei
si01.So when Umara casts magic missile, a 1st-levei
spell, she spends one ofher four 1st-leveislots and has
three remaining.
Finishing along rest restores anyexpended spell slots
(see chapter 8forthe rules on resting).
Some characters and monsters have special abilities
that letthem cast spells without using spell slots. For
example, amonk who follows the Wayofthe Four
Elements, awarlock who chooses certain eldritch
invocations, and apitfiend from the Nine Hells can ali
cast spells insuch away.
CASTlNG ASPELL ATAHIGHER LEVEL
When aspellcaster casts aspell using aslot that isofa
higher leveithan the spell, the spell assumes the higher
leveiforthat casting. For instance, ifUmara casts magic
missileusing one ofher 2nd-levei slots, that magic
missileis2nd leveI.Effectively,the spell expands tofill
the slot itisput into.
Some spells, suehas magic missile andcure wounds,
have more powerful effects when cast atahigher levei,
as detailed inaspell's description.
CANTRIPS
Acantrip isaspell that can be cast atwill,without
using aspell slot and without being prepared in
advance. Repeated practice has fixedthe spell inthe
caster's mind and infused the caster with the magic
needed toproduce the effect over and over.Acantrip's
spelllevel isO.
RITUALS
Certain spells have aspecial tag: ritual. Such aspell
ean becast following the normal rules forspelleasting,
orthe spell can becast as aritual. The ritual version of
aspell takes 10minutes longer tocast than normal.
PART 3 SPELU...\STI "G
20
It also doesn't expend a spell slot, which means the
ritual version of a spell can't be cast at a higher leveI.
To cast a spell as a ritual, a spellcaster must have a
feature that grants the ability to do so. The cleric and the
druid, for example, have such a feature. The caster must
also have the spell prepared or on his or her list of spells
known, unless the character's ritual feature specifies
otherwise, as the wizard's does.
CASTING A SPELL
When a character casts any spell, the same basic rules
are followed, regardless of the character's class or the
spell's effects.
Each spell description in chapter li begins with a block
of information, including the spell's name, levei,school
of magic, casting time, range, components, and duration.
The rest of a spell entry describes the spell's effect.
CASTING TIME
Most spells require a single action to cast, but some
spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much more
time to cast.
BONUS ACTION
A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. Vou
must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the spell,
provided that you haven't already taken a bonus action
this turno Voucan't cast another spell during the same
turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time of I action.
REACTIONS
Some spells can be cast as reactions. These spells
take a fraction of a second to bring about and are cast
in response to some event. If a spell can be cast as a
reaction, the spell description tells you exactly when
you can do sO.
LONGERCASTING TIMES
Certain spells (including spells cast as rituais) require
more time to cast: minutes or even hours. When you
cast a spell with a casting time longer than a single
action or reaction, you must spend your action each
turn casting the spell, and you must maintain your
concentration while you do so (see "Concentration"
below). ]fyour concentration is broken, the spell fails,
but you don't expend a spell slot. ]fyou want to try
casting the spell again, you must start over.
RANGE
The target of a spell must be within the spell's range.
For a spelllike magic missile, the target is a creature.
For a spelllike firebaJl, the target is the point in space
where the ball of fire erupts.
Most spells have ranges expressed in feet. Some
spells can target only a creature (including you) that you
touch. Other spells. such as the shield spell, affect only
you. These spells have a range of self.
Spells that create cones or lines of effect that originate
from you also have a range of self, indicating that the
origin point af the spell's effect must be yau (see "Areas
af Effect" later in the this chapter).
Normal activity,such as movingand attacking, doesn't
interfere withconcentration. Thefollowingfactors can
break concentration:
Casting another speIl that requires concentration.
Vouloseconcentration onaspell ifyoucast another
spell that requires concentration. Voucan't concen-
trate ontwospells atonce.
Taking damage. Whenever youtake damage while
youare concentrating onaspell,youmust make a
Constitution saving throw tomaintain yourconcentra-
tion.The DCequals 10orhalfthe damage youtake,
whichever number ishigher.lfyou take damage from
multiplesources, such asanarrow and adragon's
breath, youmake aseparate saving throw foreach
source ofdamage.
Being incapacilated or kilIed. Vouloseconcentration
onaspell ifyouare incapacitated orifyoudie.THE SCHOOLS OF MAGIC
Academies ofmagic group spells into eight categories called
schools ofmagic. Scholars, particularly wizards, apply these
categories to alispells, believing that alimagic functions in
essentially the same way,whether itderives from rigorous
study ar isbestowed byadeity.
The schools ofmagic help describe spells; they have no
rules oftheir own, although some rules refer to the schools.
Abjuration spells are protective innature, though some
ofthem have aggressive uses. Theycreate magical barriers,
negate harmful effects, harm trespassers, ar banish creatures
to other planes ofexistence.
Conjuration spells involvethe transportation ofobjects
and creatures from one location to another. Some spells
summon creatures ar objects to the caster's side, whereas
others allowthe caster to teleport to another location. Some
conjurations create objects or effects out ofnothing.
Divinalion spells reveal information, whether inthe form of
secrets long forgoUen, glimpses ofthe future, the locations
ofhidden things, the truth behind illusions, ar visions of
dislanl people or places.
Enchanlmenl spells affecl lhe minds ofolhers, influencing
ar controlling lheir behavior. Such spells can make enemies
see lhe casler as afriend, force crealures lo lake acourse of
aclion, ar even conlrol anolher crealure likea puppet.
Evocalion spells manipulate magical energy lo produce a
desired eITect.Some callup blasts offire ar lighlning. Olhers
channel posilive energy to heal wounds.
JIIusionspells deceive lhe senses ar minds ofolhers. They
cause people lo see lhings lhal are nol lhere, lo miss lhings
lhat arethere, to hear phanlom noises, ar lo remember
lhings lhal never happened. Some illusions creale phanlom
images lhal anycreature can see, but lhe mosl insidious
illusions planl an image direclly inlhe mind ofacrealure.
Necromancy spells manipulale the energies oflife and
dealh. Such spells can granl an exlra reserve oflife force,
drain the lifeenergy from anolher crealure, create the
undead, ar even bring the dead back to life.
Creating the undead lhrough lhe use ofnecromancy spells
such as animate dead isnot agood acl, and onlyevilcaslers
use such spells frequenlly.
Transmulalion spells change lhe properties ofacrealure,
object, ar environmenl. Theymighl lum an enemy inlo a
harmless creature. bolsler the slrength ofan ally,make an
object move aIthe casler's command, ar enhance acrealure's
innale healing abililies lo rapidlyrecover from injury.Onceaspelliscast,itseffectsaren't limitedbyits
range,unless thespell'sdescription saysotherwise.
COMPONENTS
Aspell's components are the physical requirements you
must meet inorder tocast it.Each spell's description
indicates whether itrequires verbal(V),somatic (S),
ormaterial (M)components. Ifyou can't provideone
ormoreofaspell's components, youare unable to
cast thespell.
VERBAL (V)
Mostspells require the chanting ofmysticwords. The
words themselves aren't the source ofthespell's power;
rather, the particular combination ofsounds, with
specificpitchand resonance, sets thethreads ofmagic
inmolion.Thus, acharacter whoisgagged orinanarea
ofsilence, such asonecreated bythe siJencespell,can't
cast aspell with averbalcomponent.
SOMATIC (S)
Spellcasting gestures mightincludeaforceful
gesticulation oranintricate set ofgestures. Ifaspell
requires asomalic component, the caster must havefree
useofatleastonehand toperform these gestures.
MATERIAL (M)
Casting some spells requires particular objects,
specified inparentheses inthe component entry.
Acharacter can useacomponent pouch ora
speIlcasting focus (foundinchapter 5)inplace of
the components specified foraspell. Butifacost is
indicated foracomponent, acharacter must havethat
specificcomponent before heorshe can cast the spell.
Ifaspell states that amaterial component is
consumed bythespell, the caster must providethis
component foreachcasting ofthespell.
Aspellcaster must haveahand free toaccess these
components, butitcan bethe same hand that heorshe
uses toperform somatic components.
DURATION
Aspell's duration isthelength oftime thespell persists.
Aduration can beexpressed inrounds, minutes, hours,
orevenyears. Some spells specifythat their effectslast
untilthespells are dispelled ordestroyed.
INSTANTANEOUS
Manyspells are instantaneous. The spell harms,
heals, creates, oralters acreature oranobjectinaway
that can't bedispelled, becauseitsmagicexists only
foraninstant.
CONCENTRATION
Some spells require youtomaintain concentration
inorder tokeep their magicactive.Ifyoulose
concentration, such aspell ends.
Ifaspell must bemaintained withconcentralion,
that factappears initsDuration entry, and lhespell
specifics howlongyoucan concentrate onit.Voucan
end concentration atanytime (noaction required).4
••••
•••
PART 3 ISrF.l LCASTI NG
203
204The DMmight also decide that certain environmental
phenomena, such as a wave crashing over you while
you're on astorm-tossed ship, require you tosucceed
on a DC 10Constitution saving throw to maintain
concentration on a spell.
TARGETS
Atypical spell requires you topick one or more targets
tobe affected bythe spell's magic. Aspell's description
tells you whether the spell targets creatures, objects, or
a point oforigin foran area ofeffect (described below).
Unless aspell has a perceptible effect, a creature
might not know itwas targeted byaspell at alI.An effect
like crackling lightning isobvious, but a more subtle
effect, such as an attempt to read a creature's thoughts,
typically goes unnoticed, unless a spell says otherwise.
ACLEAR PATH TO THE TARGET
Totarget something, you must have a clear path to it,
so itcan't be behind total cover.
lfyou place an area ofeffect at a point that you can't
see and an obstruction. such as a wall, is between you
and that point, the point oforigin comes into being on
the near side ofthat obstruction.
TARGETING YOURSELF
lfa spell targets a creature ofyour choice, you can
choose yourself, unless the creature must be hostile or
speciticallya creature other than you. lfyou are in the
area ofeffect ofa spell you cast, you can target yourself.
AREAS OF EFFECT
Spells such as burning hands andconeofcaldcover an
area, allawing them to affect multiple creatures at ance.
Aspell's description specities its area af effect,
which typically has ane oftivedifferent shapes: cone,
cube, cylinder, line, arsphere. Every area ofeffect has
a paint oforigin, a locatian fram which the spell's
energy erupts. The roles foreach shape specify how yau
PART 3ISPELLCASTINOpasition its point oforiginoTypically,
a point oforigin is a point in space, but
some spells have an area whose origin isa
creature or an object.
Aspell's effect expands in straight lines fram the point
oforigino Ifno unblocked straight line extends from the
point oforigin to a location within the area ofeffect, that
location isn't included in the spell's area. To block one of
these imaginary lines, an obstruction must provide total
cover, as explained in chapter 9.
CONE
Acone extends in a direction you choose fram its point
af originoAcone's width at a given point along its length
is equal to that point's distance from the point oforigino
Acone's area ofeffect specities its maximum length.
Acone's point oforigin is not included in the cone's
area ofeffect, unless you decide otherwise.
CUBE
Vouselect a cube's point oforigin, which lies anywhere
on a face ofthe cubic effect. The cube's size is expressed
as the length ofeach side.
Acube's point oforigin is not included in the cube's
area ofeffect, unless you decide otherwise.
CYLINDER
Acylinder's point oforigin is the center ofa circle ofa
particular radius, as given in the spell description. The
circle must either be on the graund or at the height of
the spell effect. The energy in a cylinder expands in
straight lines from the point oforigin to the perimeter of
the circle, forming the base ofthe cylinder. The spell's
effect then shoots up fram the base or down fram the
top, to a distance equal tothe height ofthe cylinder.
Acylinder's point oforigin is included in the cylinder's
area ofeffect.
4 ••
LINE
Aline extends from its point of origin in a straight path
up to its length and covers an area defined by its width.
A line's point of origin is not included in the line's area
of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
SPHERE
Vou select a sphere's point of origin, and the sphere
extends outward from that point. The sphere's
size is expressed as a radius in feet that extends
from the point.
A sphere's point of origin is included in the sphere's
area of effect.
SAVING THROWS
Many spells specify that a target can make a saving
throw to avoid some or ali of a spell's effects. The spell
specifies the ability that the target uses for the save and
what happens on a success or failure.
TheDeto resist one of your spells equals 8 +your
spellcasting ability modifier +your proficiency bonus +
any special modifiers.
ATTACK ROLLS
Some spells require the caster to make an attack roll
to determine whether the spell effect hits the intended
target. Your attack bonus with a spell attack equals your
spellcasting ability modifier +your proficiency bonus.
Most spells that require attack rolls involve ranged
attacks. Remember that you have disadvantage on a
ranged attack roll ifyou are within 5 feet of a hostile
creature that can see you and that isn't incapacitated
(see chapter 9).
COMBINING MAGICAL EFFECTS
The effects of different spells add together while
the durations of those spells overlap. The effects of
the same spell cast multi pie times don't combine,
however. lnstead, the most potent effect-such as the
highest bonus-from those castings applies while their
durations overlap.
For example, if two clerics cast blesson the same
target, that character gains the spell's benefit only
once; he or she doesn't get to roll two bonus dice.lHE WEAVE OF MAGIC
lhe worlds within the D&Dmultiverse are magical places.
Aliexistence is suffused with magical power, and potential
energy lies untapped inevery rock, stream, and living
creature, and even inthe air itself. Rawmagic isthe stuff of
creation, the mute and mindless willofexistence, permeating
every bitof malter and present in every manifestation of
energy throughout the multiverse.
Mortais can't directly shape this raw magic. Instead, they
make use ofa fabric of magic, a kind of interface between
the willofa spellcaster and the stuff of raw magic. lhe
spellcasters ofthe Forgotten Realms call itthe Weave and
recagnize its essence as the goddess Mystra, but casters
have varied ways of naming and visualizing this interface. Sy
any name, without the Weave, raw magic is locked awayand
inaccessible;the most powerful archmage can't light a candle
with magic in an area where the Weave has been tom. Sut
surrounded bythe Weave, a spellcaster can shape lightning
to blast foes, transport hundreds of miles inthe blinkof an
eye, or even reverse death itself.
Alimagic depends on the Weave, though different kinds
of magic access it in a variety ofways. lhe spells ofwizards,
warlocks, sorcerers, and bards are commonly called arcane
magic. lhese spells relyon an understanding-Iearned or
intuitive-of the workings ofthe Weave. lhe caster plucks
directly at the strands ofthe Weave to create the desired
effect. Eldritch knights and arcane tricksters also use arcane
magic. lhe spells of derics, druids, paladins, and rangers are
called divine magic. lhese spellcasters' access to the Weave
is mediated bydivine power-gods, the divine forces of
nature, or the sacred weight of a paladin's oath.
Whenever a magic effect is created, the threads ofthe
Weave intertwine, twist, and fold to make the effect possible.
When characters use divination spells such as detect magic or
identify,they glimpse the Weave. Aspell such as dispel magic
smooths the Weave. Spells such as antimagic field rearrange
the Weave 50that magic fiows around, rather than through,
the area affected bythe spell. And in places where the Weave
is damaged or tom, magic works in unpredictable ways-or
not at alI.
CHAPTER11:SPELLS
~HIS CHAPTER DESCRIBES THE MOST COMMON
speIls in the worlds of DUNGEONS &Hold Monster 1ST LEVEL
DRAGONs. The chapter begins with theLegend LoreBane
speIl Iists of the speIlcasting classes. TheMass Cure WoundsBless
remainder contains speIl descriptions,MisleadCommand
presented in alphabetical order by theModify MemoryCreate or Destroy Water
name of the spell.Planar BindingCure Wounds
BARD SPELLSHold PersonRaise DeadDetect Evil and Good
InvisibilityScryingDetect Magic
CANTRIPS (O LEVEL) KnockSeemingDetect Poison and Disease
Blade WardLesser RestorationTeleportation CircleGuiding Bolt
Dancing LightsLocate Animais or Plants6TH LEVELHealing Word
FriendsLocate Object EyebiteInflict Wounds
LightMagic Mouth Find the PathProtection from
Mage HandPhantasmal Force Guards and WardsEvil and Good
MendingSee Invisibility Mass SuggestionPurify Food and Drink
MessageShalter Olto's Irresistible DanceSanctuary
Minor IlIusionSilence Programmed IlIusionShield of Faith
PrestidigitationSuggestion True Seeing 2ND LEVEL
True StrikeZone ofTruth
Vicious Mockery7TH LEVELAid
3RD LEVEL EtherealnessAugury
1ST LEVEL Bestow Curse ForcecageBlindness/Deafness
Animal FriendshipClairvoyance Mirage ArcaneCalm Emotions
BaneDispel Magic Mordenkainen'sContinuai Flame
Charm PersonFear Magnificent MansionEnhance Ability
Comprehend LanguagesFeign Death Mordenkainen's SwordFind Traps
Cure WoundsGlyph ofWarding Project ImageGentle Repose
Detect MagicHypnotic Pattem RegenerateHold Person
Disguise SelfLeomund's Tiny Hut ResurrectionLesser Restoration
Dissonant WhispersMajor Image SymbolLocate Object
Faerie FireNondetection TeleportPrayer of Healing
Feather FaliPlant GrowthProtection from Poison
Healing WordSending8TH LEVEL Silence
HeroismSpeak with DeadDominate Monster Spiritual Weapon
IdentifySpeak with PlantsFeeblemind Warding Bond
IlIusory ScriptStinking CloudGlibness Zone ofTruth
LongstriderTonguesMind Blank
Silent ImagePower Word Stun3RD LEVEL
4TH LEVELAnimate Dead
SleepCompulsion9TH LEVEL Beacon of Hope
Speak with AnimaisConfusionForesight Bestow Curse
Tasha's Hideous LaughterDimension ODorPower Word Heal Clairvoyance
Thunderwave
Unseen ServantFreedom of MovementPower Word Kill Create Food and Water
Greater InvisibilityTrue Polymorph Daylight
2ND LEVEL Hallucinatory TerrainDispel Magic
Animal MessengerLocate CreatureCLERIC SPELLSFeign Death
Blindness/DeafnessPolymorphGlyph ofWarding
Calm Emotions5TH LEVELCANTRIPS (oLEVEL) Magic Circle
Cloud of DaggersGuidanceMass Healing Word
Crown of MadnessAnimate Objects LightMeld into Stone
Detect ThoughtsAwaken MendingProtection from Energy
Enhance AbilityDominate Person ResistanceRemove Curse
EnthrallDream Sacred Flame Revivify
Heat MetalGeas Spare the Dying Sending
Greater Restoration Thaumaturgy Speak with Dead
PART 3 SPfLlS ,"
Spirit Guardians Gate Dispel Magic Mirage Arcane
Tongues Mass Heal Feign Death Plane Shift
Water Walk True Resurrection Meld into Stone Regenerate
4TH LEVELPlant Growth Reverse Gravity
BanishmentDRUID SPELLS Protection from Energy
Sleet Storm8TH LEVEL
Control Water
Death WardCANTRIPS (oLEVEL) Speak with PlantsAnimal Shapes
DivinationDruidcraftWater BreathingAntipathyjSympathy
Freedom of MovementGuidanceWater WalkControl Weather
Guardian of FaithMendingWind WallEarthquake
Locate CreaturePoison SprayFeeblemind
4TH LEVEL
Stone ShapeProduce FlameSunburst
ResistanceBlight Tsunami
5TH LEVEL ShillelaghConfusion
Commune Thorn WhipConjure Minor Elementals9TH LEVEL
ContagionConjure Woodland BeingsForesight
Dispel Evil and Good1ST LEVEL Control WaterShapechange
Flame StrikeAnimal Friendship Dominate BeastStorm ofVengeance
GeasCharm Person Freedom of MovementTrue Resurrection
Greater RestorationCreate or Destroy Water Giant Insect
HallowCure WoundsGrasping VinePALADIN SPELLS
Insect PlagueDetect Magic Hallucinatory Terrain
Legend LoreDetect Poison and Disease Ice Storm1ST LEVEL
Mass Cure WoundsEntangle Locate Creature Bless
Planar BindingFaerie Fire PolymorphCommand
Raise DeadFog Cloud Stone ShapeCompelled Duel
ScryingGoodberry StoneskinCure Wounds
Healing Word Wall of FireDetect Evil and Good
6TH LEVEL jumpDetect Magic
Blade Barrier Longstrider5TH LEVELDetect Poison and Disease
Create Undead Purify Food and DrinkAntilife Shell Divine Favor
Find the Path Speak with AnimaisAwaken Heroism
Forbiddance ThunderwaveCommune with Nature Protection from
HarmConjure Elemental Evil and Good
Heal2ND LEVEL Contagion Purify Food and Drink
Heroes' FeastAnimal Messenger Geas Searing Smite
Planar AllyBarkskinGreater Restoration Shield of Faith
True SeeingBeast SenseInsect Plague Thunderous Smite
Word of RecallDarkvisionMass Cure Wounds Wrathful Smite
Enhance AbilityPlanar Binding
7TH LEVEL Find TrapsReincarnate2ND LEVEL
Conjure CelestialFlame BladeScryingAid
Divine WordFlaming SphereTree StrideBranding Smite
EtherealnessGust ofWindWall ofStoneFind Steed
Fire StormHeat Metal6TH LEVELLesser Restoration
Plane ShiftHold PersonLocate Object
RegenerateLesser RestorationConjure Fey Magic Weapon
ResurrectionLocate Animais or PlantsFind the Path Protection from Poison
SymbolLocate ObjectHeal Zone ofTruth
MoonbeamHeroes' Feast
8TH LEVELPass without TraceMove Earth3RD LEVEL
Antimagic Field Protection from PoisonSunbeamAura ofVitality
Control Weather Spike GrowthTransport via PlantsBlinding Smite
EarthquakeWall ofThornsCreate Food and Water
Holy Aura3RD LEVEL Wind WalkCrusader's Mantle
9TH LEVELCall Lightning7TH LEVELDaylight
Conjure AnimaisDispel Magic
Astral Projection DaylightFire Storm Elemental Weapon
208PART 3 ISPFLLS
Magic Circle Plant Growth Sleep Greater Invisibility
Remove Curse Protection from Energy Thunderwave Ice Storm
Revivify Speak with Plants Witch Bolt Polymorph
4TH LEVELWater Breathing
2ND LEVELStoneskin
Water Walk Wall of Fire
Aura of LifeWind WallAlter Self
Aura of Purity BlindnessjDeafness 5TH LEVEL
Banishment 4TH LEVEL Blur Animate Objects
Death Ward Conjure Woodland Beings Cloud of Daggers Cloudkill
Locate Creature Freedom of Movement Crown of Madness Cone ofCold
Staggering Smite Grasping Vine Darkness ereation
Locate Creature Darkvision Dominate Person
5TH LEVELStoneskin Detect Thoughts Hold Monster
Banishing SmiteEnhance Ability Insect Plague
Cirele of Power 5TH LEVELEnlargejReduce Seeming
Destructive Smite Commune with NatureGust ofWind Telekinesis
Dispel Eviland Good Conjure VolleyHold Person Teleportation Cirele
Geas Swift QuiverInvisibility Wall of Stone
Raise Dead Tree StrideKnock
Levitate6TH LEVEL
RANGER SPELLS SORCERER SPELLSMirror ImageArcane Gate
Misty StepChain Lightning
1ST LEVEL CANTRIPS (O LEVEL)Phantasmal ForceCirele of Death
Alarm Acid Splash Scorching RayDisintegrate
Animal Friendship Blade Ward See InvisibilityEyebite
Cure Wounds Chill Touch ShatterGlobe of Invulnerability
Detect Magic Dancing Lights Spider ClimbMass Suggestion
Detect Poison and Disease Fire Bolt SuggestionMove Earth
Ensnaring Strike Friends WebSunbeam
Fog Cloud Light True Seeing
Goodberry Mage Hand3RD LEVEL
7TH LEVEL
Hail ofThorns Mending Blink
Hunter's Mark Message ClairvoyanceDelayed Blast Fireball
Etherealness)ump Minor IlIusion Counterspell
Finger of DeathLongstrider Poison Spray Daylight
Dispel MagicFire StormSpeak with Animais PrestidigitationPlane ShiftRayof Frost Fear
2ND LEVELShocking Grasp FireballPrismatic Spray
Animal MessengerTrue Strike FlyReverse Gravity
Barkskin Gaseous FormTeleport
Beast Sense 1ST LEVELHaste8TH LEVEL
Cordon ofArrows Burning HandsHypnotic PatternDominate Monster
Darkvision Charm PersonLightning BoltEarthquakeFind Traps Chromatic OrbMajor ImageIncendiary CloudLesser Restoration Color SprayProtection from EnergyPower Word StunLocate Animais or Plants Comprehend LanguagesSleet StormSunburstLocate Object Detect MagicSlow
Pass without Trace Disguise SeifStinking Cloud 9TH LEVEL
Protection from Poison Expeditious RetreatTongues Gate
Silence False LifeWater Breathing Meteor Swarm
Spike Growth Feather FaliWater Walk Power Word Kill
3RD lEVELFog CloudTime Stop
jump4TH LEVELWishConjure AnimaisMage Armor Banishment
Conjure BarrageMagic Missile Blight
DaylightRayof Sickness Confusion
Lightning ArrowShield Dimension Door
NondetectionSilent Image Dominate Beast
PART 3 ISPELLS2°9
Dimension Door 1ST LEVEL Misty StepWARLOCK SPELLS
Nystul's Magic Aura Hallucinatory TerrainAlarm
Phantasmal ForceCANTRIPS (oLEVEL)5TH LEVELBurning Hands
Rayof EnfeeblementCharm PersonBlade WardContact Other Plane
Chromatic OrbRope TrickChill TouchDream
Color SprayScorching RayEldritch BlastHold Monster
Comprehend LanguagesSee InvisibilityFriendsScrying
Detect MagicShatterMage Hand
Disguise SelfSpider Climb6TH LEVEL
SuggestionMinor IlIusion
Expeditious Retreat Poison Spray Arcane Gate
False LifeWebPrestidigitation Cirele of Death
Feather Fali3RD LEVELTrue Strike Conjure Fey
Find FamiliarAnimate DeadCreate Undead
1ST LEVEL
Eyebite Fog CloudBestow CurseArmor of AgathysFlesh to Stone GreaseBlinkArms of HadarMass Suggestion IdentifyClairvoyanceCharm PersonTrue Seeing IlIusory ScriptCounterspellComprehend LanguagesjumpDispel MagicExpeditious Retreat 7TH LEVELLongstriderFearHellish Rebuke EtherealnessMage ArmorFeign DeathHex Finger of DeathMagic MissileFireballIlIusory Script ForcecageProtection from
FlyProtection from Plane ShiftEvil and GoodGaseous FormEvil and Good
8TH LEVELRayof SicknessGlyph ofWardingUnseen ServantShieldHasteWitch BoltDemiplane
Silent ImageHypnotic Pattern Dominate Monster
SleepLeomund's Tiny Hut 2ND LEVEL Feeblemind
Tasha's Hideous LaughterLightning Bolt Cloud of Daggers Glibness
Tenser's Floating DiskMagic Cirele Crown of Madness Power Word Stun
ThunderwaveMajor Image Darkness
9TH LEVEL Unseen ServantNondetection Enthrall
Astral Projection Witch BoltPhantom Steed Hold Person
Foresight
2ND LEVEL Protection from Energy Invisibility
Imprisonment
Alter SelfRemove Curse Mirror Image
Power Word Kill
Arcane LockSending Misty Step
True Polymorph
Blindness/DeafnessSleet Storm Rayof Enfeeblement
Slow Shatter
WIZARD SPELLSBlur
Stinking Cloud Spider ClimbCloud of Daggers
Continuai FlameTongues Suggestion
CANTRIPS (oLEVEL)
Crown of MadnessVampiric Touch
3RD LEVELAcid SplashDarknessWater Breathing
Counterspell Blade WardDarkvision4TH LEVEL Dispel Magic Chill TouchDetect ThoughtsArcane Eye Fear Dancing LightsEnlarge/ReduceBanishment Fly Fire BoltFlaming SphereBlight Gaseous Form FriendsGentle ReposeConfusion Hunger of Hadar LightGust ofWindConjure Minor Elementals Hypnotic Pattern Mage HandHold PersonControl Water Magic Cirele MendingInvisibilityDimension ODor Major Image MessageKnockEvard's Black Tentades Remove Curse Minor IlIusionLevitateFabricate Tongues Poison SprayLocate ObjectFire Shield Vampiric Touch PrestidigitationMagic MouthGreater Invisibility
4TH LEVELRayof FrostMagic WeaponHallucinatory TerrainShocking GraspMelf's Acid ArrowIce StormBanishment
True StrikeMirror ImageLeomund's Secret ChestBlight
PART 3ISPELLS
210
Loeale Crealure
Mordenkainen's
Failhful Hound
Mordenkainen's
Privale Sanelum
Oliluke's Resilienl Sphere
Phanlasmal Killer
Polymorph
Slone Shape
Sloneskin
Wall ofFire
5TH LEVEL
Animale Objeels
Bigby's Hand
Cloudkill
Cone ofCold
Conjure Elemenlal
Conlael Olher Plane
Crealion
Dominale Person
Dream
Geas
Hold Monsler
Legend Lore
Mislead
Modify Memory
Passwall
Planar Binding
Rary's Telepalhie Bond
Serying
Seeming
Telekinesis
Teleporlalion Cirele
Wall of Force
Wall of Slone
6TH LEVEL
Areane Gale
Chain Lighlning
Cirele of Dealh
Conlingeney
Creale Undead
Disinlegrale
Drawmij's Inslanl
Summons
Eyebile
Flesh lo Slone
Globe of Invulnerabilily
Guards and Wards
Magie Jar
Mass Suggeslion
Move Earlh
Oliluke's Freezing Sphere
0110'5 Irresislible Dance
Programmed IllusionSunbeam
True Seeing
Wall oflee
7TH LEVEL
Delayed BiasI Fireball
Elherealness
Finger of Dealh
Foreeeage
Mirage Areane
Mordenkainen's
Magnifieenl Mansion
Mordenkainen's Sword
Plane Shifl
Prismalie Spray
Projeel Image
Reverse Gravily
Sequesler
Simulaerum
Symbol
Teleporl
8TH LEVEL
Anlimagie Field
Anlipalhy/Sympalhy
Clone
Conlrol Wealher
Demiplane
Dominale Monsler
Feeblemind
Ineendiary Cloud
Maze
Mind Blank
Power Word Slun
Sunbursl
Telepalhy
Trap lhe Soul
9TH LEVEL
Aslral Projeelion
Foresighl
Gale
Imprisonmenl
Meleor Swarm
Power Word Kill
Prismalie Wall
Shapeehange
Time Slop
True Polymorph
Weird
WishSPELL DESCRIPTIONS
The spells are presented in alphabetical order.
ACID SPLASH
Conjuration calltrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feel
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouhurl a bubble ofacid. Choose one creature within
range, or choose two crealures within range thal are
wilhin 5feet ofeach other. Atarget must succeed on a
Dexterity saving throw or lake Id6 acid damage.
This spell's damage increases by Id6 when you reach
5th leveI(2d6), 11th leveI(3d6), and 17lh leveI(4d6).
AID
2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(atiny strip ofwhile clOlh)
Duration: 8 hours
Your spell bolsters your allies with toughness and
resolve. Choose up tothree crealures within range.
Each target's hit poinl maximum and current hit points
increase by5for the duration.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of3rd leveIor higher, a largel's hit points
increase byan additional 5foreach slot leveIabove 2nd.
ALARM
1st-leveIabjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: I minule
Range: 30 feet
Components: V.S, M(atiny bell and a piece of
fine silver wire)
Duration: 8 hours
VouseI an alarm against unwanted inlrusion. Choose
a door. awindow, or an area wilhin range that isno
larger lhan a 20-foot cube. Until lhe spell ends. an alarm
alerts you whenever a Tiny or larger creature louches
or enters lhe warded area. When you cast the spell, you
can designale crealures lhat won't set offthe alarmo Vou
also choose whether the alarm ismental or audible.
Amental alarm alerts you with a ping inyour mind
ifyou are within I mile ofthe warded area. This ping
awakens you ifyou are sleeping.
An audible alarm produces lhe sound ofa hand bell
for 10seconds within 60 feel.
ALTER SELF
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeIf
Components: V,S
Duration: Concenlralion. up to I hour
Vouassume a different formoWhen you cast lhe spell.
choose one ofthe following options, the effects ofwhich
last forthe duralion ofthe spell. While lhe spelllasts,
PART 3 SPELLS
2Il
212you can end one oplion as an aclion lo gain lhe benefils
ofa differenl one.
AquaticAdaptation. Vouadapl your body lo an
aqualic environmenl, sprouting gills and growing
webbing belween your fingers. Voucan brealhe
underwaler and gain a swimming speed equal loyour
walking speed.
Change Appearance. Voulransform your appearance.
Voudecide whal you look like, including your heighl,
weighl, facial fealures, sound ofyour voice, hair lenglh,
coloralion, and dislinguishing characlerislics, ifany,
Voucan make yourself appear as a member ofanolher
race, lhough none ofyour slalislics change. Voualso
can'l appear as a crealure ofa differenl size lhan you,
and your basic shape slays lhe same; ifyou're bipedal,
you can'l use lhis spell lo become quadrupedal, for
inslance. AIany lime forlhe duralion oflhe spell, you
can use your action lOchange your appearance in
lhis way again.
Natural Weapons. Vougrow claws, fangs, spines,
horns, or a differenl nalural weapon ofyour choice. Your
unarmed slrikes deal ld6 bludgeoning, piercing, or
slashing damage, as appropriale lolhe nalural weapon
you chose, and you are proficienl wilh your unarmed
slrikes. Finally, lhe natural weapon is magic and you
have a +1bonus lo lhe atlack and damage rolls you
make using it.
ANIMAL FRIENDSHIP
lst.level enchantment
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S, M(amorsel offood)
Duration: 24 hours
This spelllels you convince a beasl lhal you mean ilno
harm. Choose a beasl lhal you can see wilhin range.
Itmusl see and hear you. Irlhe beast's Inlelligence is
4 or higher, lhe spell fails. Olherwise, lhe beasl musl
succeed on a Wisdom saving lhrow or be charmed
byyou forlhe spell's duralion. Ifyou or one ofyour
companions harms lhe largel, lhe spells ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell sI 01of2nd leveIor higher, you can affecl one
addilional beasl foreach slol leveIabove 1st.
ANIMAL MESSENGER
2nd.level enchantment (ritual)
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S, M(amorsel offood)
Duration: 24 hours
Bymeans oflhis spell, you use an animal todeliver a
message. Choose a Tiny beasl youcan see wilhin range,
such as a squirrel, a bluejay,or a bat. Vouspecify a
localion, which you musl have visiled, and a recipienl
who malches a general descriplion, such as "a man or
woman dressed in lhe uniform oflhe town guard" or "a
red.haired dwarf wearing a poinled hat." Voualso speak
a message ofup lOlwenly-fivewords. The largel beasl
lravels forlhe duralion oflhe spell loward lhe specified
PART 3 ISPELLSlocalion, covering aboul 50 miles per 24 hours fora
flyingmessenger, or 25 miles forolher animaIs.
When lhe messenger arrives, ildelivers your message
lo lhe crealure lhal you described, replicating lhe sound
ofyour voice. The messenger speaks only lo a crealure
malching lhe descriplion you gave. Iflhe messenger
doesn'l reach its deslinalion before lhe spell ends, lhe
message is losl, and lhe beasl makes ils wayback to
where you casl lhis spell.
At Higher LeveIs. Ifyou casl lhis spell using a spell
slot of3nd leveior higher, lhe duralion oflhe spell
increases by48 hours foreach slol leveiabove 2nd.
ANIMAL SHAPES
8th./evel transmutatioIl
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S
Duration: Concenlralion, up to 24 hours
Yourmagic lurns others into beasts. Choose any
number ofwilling crealures lhal you can see within
range. Voutransform each targel into the form ofa
Large or smaller beasl wilh a challenge rating of4 or
lower. On subsequent turns, you can use your action to
transform affected creatures inlo new forms.
The transformation lasls forlhe duration for each
largel, or until the target drops to Ohit points or dies.
Voucan choose a different form foreach larget. A
largel's game stalistics are replaced bythe stalislics of
lhe chosen beast, though the largel relains ils alignmenl
and Inlelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. The
largel assumes lhe hil poinls ofils new form, and when
itreverls lo ils normal form, ilrelurns to the number
ofhil points ithad before illransformed. Ifilreverls as
a result ofdropping to Ohit poinls, any excess damage
carries over lo ils normal formoAs long as the excess
damage doesn'l reduce lhe crealure's normal form lo O
hil poinls, itisn'l knocked unconscious. The creature is
limiled in lhe aclions ilcan perform bylhe nalure ofits
new form, and itcan'l speak or casl spells.
The largel's gear melds into lhe new formoThe largel
can't aclivate, wield, or olherwise benefil from any of
ils equipment.
ANIMATE DEAD
3rd./evel necromancy
Casting Time: 1minule
Range: 10feel
Components: V,S, M(adrop ofblood, a piece offlesh,
and a pinch ofbone dust)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
This spell creates an undead servant. Choose a pile
ofbones or a corpse ofa Medium or Small humanoid
within range. Yourspell imbues lhe targel wilh a foul
mimicry oflife, raising ilas an undead crealure. The
largel becomes a skeleton ifyou chose bones or a
zombie ifyou chose a corpse (lhe DMhas lhe crealure's
game slalislics).
On each ofyour lurns, you can use a bonus aclion
lOmentally command any crealure you made with
lhis spell iflhe creature is within 60 feel ofyou (ifyou
An animated object is a construct with AC, hit points,
attacks, Strength, and Dexterity determined by its size.
Its Constitution is 10and its Intelligence and Wisdomcontrol multipie creatures, you can command any or all
of them at the same time, issuing the same command to
each one). Vou decide what action the creature will take
and where it will move during its next turn, or you can
issue a general command, such as to guard a particular
chamber or corridor. lf you issue no commands, the
creature only defends itself against hostile creatures.
Once given an order, the creature continues to follow it
until its task is complete.
The creature is under your control for 24 hours,
after which it stops obeying any command you've given
it. To maintain control of the creature for another
24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature
again before the current 24-hour period ends. This
use of the spell reasserts your control over up to four
creatures you have animated with this spell, rather than
animating a new one.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, you animate or reassert
contraI over two additional undead creatures for each
slot levei above 3rd. Each of the creatures must come
from a different corpse or pile of bones.
ANIMATE OBJECTS
5th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Objects come to \ife at your command. Choose up to
ten nonmagical objects within range that are not being
worn or carried. Medium targets count as two objects,
Large targets count as four objects, Huge targets
count as eight objects. Voucan't animate any object
larger than Huge. Each target animates and becomes a
creature under your contrai until the spell ends or until
reduced to Ohit points.
As a bonus action, you can mentally command any
creature you made with this spell if the creature is
within 500 feet ofyou (ifyou contrai multiple creatures,
you can command any or all of them at the same time,
issuing the same command to each one). Voudecide
what action the creature will take and where it will
move during its next turn, or you can issue a general
command, such as to guard a particular chamber or
corridor. Ifyou issue no commands, the creature only
defends itself against hostile creatures. Once given
an order, the creature continues to follow it until its
task is complete.
ANIMATED OB/ECT STATISTICS
Size HP AC Attack
Tiny 20 18 +8 to hit, 1d4 + 4 damage
5mall 25 16 +6 to hit, ld8 + 2 damage
Medium 40 13 +5 to hit. 2d6 + 1 damage
Large 50 10 +6 to hit. 2dlO + 2 damage
Huge 80 10 +8 to hit. 2d12 + 4 damageStr Dex
4 18
6 14
10 12
14 10
18 6are 3, and its Charisma is 1.Its speed is 30 feet; if the
object lacks legs or other appendages it can use for
locomotion, it instead has a f1yingspeed of 30 feet and
can hover. lf the object is securely attached to a surface
or a larger object, sueh as a chain bolted to a wall, its
speed is O.It has blindsight with a radius of 30 feet and
is b\ind beyond that distance. When the animated object
drops to Ohit points, it reverts to its original object
form, and any remaining damage carries over to its
original object formo
lf you command an object to attack, it can make a
single melee attack against a creature within 5 feet
of it. [t makes a slam attack with an attack bonus and
bludgeoning damage determined by its size. The DM
might rule that a specific object inflicts slashing or
piercing damage based on its formo
At Higher Leve/s. Ifyou cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, you can animate two
additional objects for each slot leveI above 5th.
ANTILIFE SHELL
5th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (IO-footradius)
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Ashimmering barrier extends out from you in a IO-foot
radius and moves with you, remaining centered on
you and hedging out creatures other than undead and
constrllcts. The barrier lasts for the duration.
The barrier prevents an affected creature from
passing or reaching through. An affected creature
can cast spells or make attacks with ranged or reach
weapons through the barrier.
Ifyou move so that an affected creatllre is forced to
pass through the barrier, the spell ends.
ANTIMAGIC FIELD
8th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self (IO-foot-radius sphere)
Components: V,S, M (a pinch of powdered iron or
iron filings)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
A 10-foot-radius invisible sphere of antimagic surraunds
you. This area is divorced fram the magical energy that
suffuses the multiverse. Within the sphere, spells can't
be cast, summoned creatures disappear, and even magic
items become mundane. Unti! the spell ends, the sphere
moves with you, centered on you.
Spells and other magical effects, except those created
by an artifact or a deity, are suppressed in the sphere
and can't protrude into it. Aslot expended to cast
a suppressed spell is consumed. While an effect is
suppressed, it doesn't function, but the time it spends
suppressed counts against its duration.
Targeted Effects. Spells and other magical effects,
such asma(jicmissi/e and charm person, that target
a creature or an object in the sphere have no effect
on that target.
PART 3 SPELLS
2
13
2
11Areas ofMagie. The area ofanother spell or magical
effect,such as fireball,can't extend into the sphere.
Ifthe sphere overlaps an area ofmagic, the part of
the area that iscovered bythe sphere issuppressed.
Forexample, the liames created bya wall offire are
suppressed within the sphere, creating agapinthe wall
ifthe overlap islarge enough.
Spells.Anyactive spell or other magical effectona
creature or an object inthe sphere issuppressed while
the creature or object isini!.
Magie ltems. The properties and powers of
magic items are suppressed inthe sphere. For
example, a +llongsword inthe sphere functions as a
nonmagicallongsword.
Amagic weapon's properties and powers are
suppressed ifitisused against a target inthe sphere or
wielded byan attacker inthe sphere. Ifa magic weapon
or a piece ofmagic ammunition fullyleaves the sphere
(forexample, ifyou firea magic arrow or throw amagic
spear atatarget outside the sphere), the magic ofthe
itemceases tobe suppressed as soon as itexits.
Magieal TraveI. Teleportation and planar travei
failtowork inthe sphere, whether the sphere isthe
destination or the departure point forsuch magical
traveI.Aportal toanother location, world, or plane of
existence, as wellas an opening toan extradimensional
space such as that created bythe rope trick spell,
temporarily doses while inthe sphere.
Creatures and Objeets. Acreature or object
summoned or created bymagic temporarily winks out
ofexistence inthe sphere. Such acreature instantly
reappears once the space the creature occupied isno
longer within the sphere.
Dispel Magie. Spells and magical effects such as
dispel magic have noeffectonthe sphere. Likewise, the
spheres created bydifferent antimagic field spells don't
nullifyeach other.
ANTIPATHy/SYMPATHY
8th~evelenchantment
Casting Time: 1hour
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(either a lump ofalum soaked in
vinegar forthe antipathyeffectora drop ofhoney for
thesympathyeffect)
Duration: 10days
This spell attracts or repels creatures ofyour choice.
Voutarget something within range, either a Hugeor
smaller object or creature or an area that isnolarger
than a 200.foot cube. Then specify akind ofintelligent
creature, such as red dragons, goblins, orvampires.
Vouinvest the target with an aura that either attracts or
repels the specified creatures forthe duration. Choose
antipathy or sympathy as the aura's effec!.
Antipathy. Thc cnchantmcnt causes creatures ofthe
kindyou designated tofeelan intense urge toleavethe
area and avoidthe targe!. When such acreature can
see the target or comes within 60 feetofit,the creature
must succeed onaWisdom saving throw or become
frightened. The creature remains frightened while itcan
see the target or iswithin 60 feet ofi!.While frightened
bythe target, the creature must use itsmovement to
PART 3ISPELLSmove tothe nearest safe spot from which itcan't see
the targe!. Ifthe creature moves more than 60 feetfrom
the target and can't see it,the creature isnolonger
frightened, but the creature becomes frightened again if
itregains sight ofthe target or moves within 60 feetofi!.
Sympathy. The enchantment causes the specified
creatures tofeelan intense urge toapproach the target
while within 60 feet ofitor able tosee it.When such a
creature can see the target or comes within 60 feetofit,
the creature must succeed onaWisdom saving throw or
use itsmovement oneach ofitsturns toenter the area
or movewithin reach ofthe targe!. When the creature
has done so, itcan't willingly moveawayfram the targe!.
Ifthe target damages or otherwise harms an affected
creature, the affected crealure can make aWisdom
saving throw toend the effect,as described below.
Ending the Elfeet. Ifan affected creature ends its
turn while notwithin 60 feet ofthe target or able tosee
it,the creature makes aWisdom saving thraw. Ona
successful save, the creature isnolonger affected by
the target and recognizes the feeling ofrepugnance or
attraction as magical. Inaddition, acreature affected by
the spell isallowed another Wisdom saving throw every
24 hours while the spell persists.
Acreature that successfully saves against this effect
is immune toitfor 1minute, after which time itcan be
affected again.
ARCANE EYE
4th.level divination
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S,M(abitofbat fur)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1hour
Voucreate an invisible, magical eyewithin range that
hovers inthe air forthe duration.
Voumentally receive visual information fram the eye,
which has normal visionand darkvision out to30 fee!.
The eyecan lookineverydirection.
Asan action, youcan movethe eyeupto30 feet in
anydirection. There isnolimittohowfar awayfrom
youthe eyecan move,but itcan't enter another plane
ofexistence. Asolid barrier blocks the eye's movement,
but the eyecan pass through an opening as small as 1
inch indiameter.
ARCANE GATE
6th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 500 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, upto 10minutes
Voucreate linked teleportation portais that remain open
forthe duration. Choose two points onthe graund that
youcan see, one point within 10feetofyou and one
point within 500 feetofyou.Acircular portal, 10feet
indiameter, opens overeach poin!. Ifthe portal would
open inthe space occupied byacreature, the spell fails,
and the casting islos!.
The portais are two.dimensional glowingrings
filledwithmist,hoveringinches fram lhe ground and
perpendicular to it at the points you choose. Aring is
visible only from one side (your choice), which is the side
that functions as a portal.
Any creature or object entering the portal exits from
the other portal as ifthe two were adjacent to each
other; passing through a portal from the nonportal side
has no effect. The mist that fills each portal is opaque
and blocks vision through it. On your turn, you can
rotate the rings as a bonus action so that the active side
faces in a different direction.
ARCANE LOCK
2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(gold dust worth at least 25 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
Voutouch a closed door, window, gate, chest, or other
entryway, and it becomes locked for the duration. Vou
and the creatures you designate when you cast this
spell can open the object normally. Voucan also set a
password that, when spoken within 5 feet ofthe object,
suppresses this spell for 1minute. Otherwise, it is
impassable until it is broken or the spell is dispelled or
suppressed. Casting knockon the object suppresses
arcane lock for 10minutes.
While affected by this spell, the object is more difficult
to break or force open; the DC to break it or pick any
locks on it increases by 10.
ARMOR OF AGATHYS
1st-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(a cup ofwater)
Duration: 1hour
Aprotective magical force surrounds you, manifesting
as a spectral frost that covers you and your gear.
Vougain 5 temporary hit points for the duration. Ifa
creature hits you with a melee attack while you have
these hit points, the creature takes 5 cold damage.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, both the temporary hit
points and the cold damage increase by 5 for each slot
leveI above 1st.
AR MS OF HADAR
1st-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self (lO-foot radius)
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouinvoke the power of Hadar, the Dark Hunger.
Tendrils of dark energy erupt from you and batter ali
creatures within 10feet ofyou. Each creature in that
area must make a Strength saving throw. On a failed
save, a target takes 2d6 necrotic damage and can't take
reactions until its next turno On a successful save, the
creature takes half damage, but suffers no other effect.At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot leveI above 1st.
ASTRAL PROJECTION
9th-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: 1hour
Range: 10 feet
Components: V,S, M(for each creature you affect with
this spell, you must provide one jacinth worth at least
1,000 gp and one ornately carved bar of silver worth
at least 100 gp, ali ofwhich the spell consumes)
Duration: Special
Vouand up to eight willing creatures within range
project your astral bodies into the Astral Plane (the
spell fails and the casting is wasted ifyou are already
on that plane). The material body you leave behind is
unconscious and in a state of suspended animation; it
doesn't need food or air and doesn't age.
Your astral body resembles your mortal form in
almost every way, replicating your game statistics and
possessions. The principal difference is the addition of
a silvery cord that extends from between your shoulder
blades and trails behind you, fading to invisibility after
1fool. This cord is your tether to your material body. As
long as the tether remains intact, you can find your way
home. Ifthe cord is cut-something that can happen
only when an effect specifically states that it does-your
soul and body are separated, killing you instantly.
Your astral form can freely travei through the Astral
Plane and can pass through portais there leading to any
other plane. Ifyou enter a new plane or return to the
plane you were on when casting this spell, your body and
possessions are transported along the silver cord, allowing
you to re-enter your body as you enter the new plane.
Your astral form is a separate incarnation. Anydamage
or other effects that apply to ithave no effect on your
physical body, nor do they persist when you return to it.
The spell ends for you and your companions when
you use your action to dismiss il. When the spell ends,
the affected creature returns to its physical body,
and it awakens.
The spell might also end early for you or one ofyour
companions. Asuccessful dispel magic spell used
against an astral or physical body ends the spell for that
creature. If a creature's original body or its astral form
drops to Ohit points, the spell ends for that creature. If
the spell ends and the silver cord is intact, the cord pulls
the creature's astral form back to its body, ending its
state of suspended animation.
Ifyou are returned to your body prematurely, your
companions remain in their astral forms and must find
their own way back to their bodies, usually by dropping
to Ohit points.
AUGURY
2nd-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: Sei f
Components: V,S, M(specially marked sticks, bones,
or similar tokens worth at least 25 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
PART 3 SPELLS
2
15
216Bycasting gem-inlaid sticks, rolling dragon bones,
laying out ornate cards, or employing some other
divining tool,you receive an omen from an otherworldly
entity about the results ofaspecific course ofaction that
you plan totake within the next 30 minutes, The DM
chooses from the following possible omens:
Weal,forgood results
Woe,forbad results
Wealand woe, for both good and bad results
Nothing,for results that aren't especially good or bad
The spell doesn't take into account any possible
circumstances that might change the outcome, such
as the casting ofadditional spells or the loss or gain
ofacompanion.
Ifyou cast the spell two or more times before
completing your next long rest, there isacumulative 25
percent chance for each casting after the first that you
get a random reading. The DMmakes this roll insecret.
AURA OF LIFE
4th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Life-preserving energy radiates from you inan aura with
a30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves
with you, centered onyou. Each nonhostile creature
in the aura (including you) has resistance to necrotic
damage, and its hit point maximum can't be reduced. In
addition, anonhostile, living creature regains I hit point
when itstarts its turn inthe aura with Ohit points.
AURA OF PURITY
4th-leveIabjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Seif(30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Purifying energy radiates from you inan aura with a
30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves
with you, centered onyou. Each nonhostile creature
in the aura (including you)can't become diseased,
has resistance to poison damage, and has advantage
on saving throws against effects that cause any ofthe
following conditions: blinded, charmed, deafened,
frightened, paralyzed, poisoned, and stunned.
AURA OF VITALITY
3rd-level evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, upto I minute
Healing energy radiates from you inan aura with a
30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves with
you, centered onyou. Voucan use abonus action to
cause one creature inthe aura (including you) toregain
2d6 hit points.
PART 3 ISPEI.LSAWAKEN
5th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 8hours
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(anagate worth at least 1,000 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
After spending the casting time tracing magical
pathways within a precious gemstone, you touch a Huge
or smaller beast or plant. The target must have either
no Intelligence score or an Intelligence of3or less. The
target gains an Intelligence of 10.The target also gains
the ability tospeak one language you know. ]fthe target
isaplant, itgains the ability to move its Iimbs, roots,
vines, creepers, and so forth, and itgains senses similar
toa human's. Your DMchooses statistics appropriate
for the awakened plant, such as the statistics forthe
awakened shrub or the awakened tree.
The awakened beast or plant ischarmed byyou for
30 days or until you oryour companions doanything
harmful toit.When the charmed condition ends,
the awakened creature chooses whether to remain
friendly toyou, based on how you treated itwhile
itwas charmed.
BANE
1st-leveIenchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(adrop ofblood)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Uptothree creatures ofyour choice that you can see
within range must make Charisma saving throws.
Whenever atarget that fails this saving throw makes
an attack roll or asaving throw before the spell ends,
the target must roll ad4 and subtract the number rolled
from the attack roll or saving throw.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
aspell slot of2nd leveior higher, you can target one
additional creature foreach slot leveIabove 1st.
BANISHING SMITE
5th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, upto I minute
The next time you hit acreature with aweapon attack
before this spell ends, your weapon crackles with force,
and the attack deals an extra 5dlO force damage tothe
target. Additionally, ifthis attack reduces the target
to50 hit points or fewer, you banish it.Ifthe target is
native toadifferent plane ofexistence than the one
you're on, the target disappears, returning toits home
plane. ]fthe target isnative tothe plane you're on, the
creature vanishes into aharmless demiplane. While
there, the target is incapacitated. Itremains there until
the spell ends, at which point the target reappears in the
space itleftor in the nearest unoccupied space ifthat
space isoccupied.J
I
BEAST SENSE
2nd-level divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
Voutouchawilling beast. For the duration ofthe speIl,
you can use your action tosee through the beast's eyes
and hear what ithears, and continue todo so until
youuse your action toreturn toyour normal senses.BARKSKIN
2nd-level transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5,M(ahandfuI ofoak bark)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
Voutouch awilling creature. Until the spel1ends, the
target's skin has arough, bark-like appearance, and the
target's ACcan't be less than 16,regardless ofwhat kind
ofarmar itiswearing.
BEACON OF HOPE
3rd-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
This spel1bestows hope and vitality. Choose any
number ofcreatures within range. For the duration,
each target has advantage on Wisdom saving throws
and death saving throws, and regains the maximum
number ofhit points possible from any healing.,BANISHMENT
4th-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5,M(an item distastefuI tothe target)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Vouattempt tosend one creature that you can see
within range toanother plane ofexistence. The
target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw
ar be banished.
1fthe target isnative tothe plane ofexistence you're
on,you banish the target toaharmless demiplane.
While there, the target isincapacitated. The target
remains there until the spel1ends, at which point the
target reappears inthe space itleft ar in the nearest
unoccupied space ifthat space isoccupied.
1fthe target is native toadifferent plane ofexistence
than the one you're on, the target isbanished with
a faint popping noise, returning toits home plane.
]fthe spel1ends before 1minute has passed, the
target reappears inthe space itleftar in the nearest
unoccupied space ifthat space isoccupied. Otherwise,
the target doesn't returno
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spel1using
aspel1slot of5th leveiar higher, you can target one
additional creature foreach slot leveiabove 4th.
218Whileperceivingthrough thebeast's senses, yougain
thebenefitsofanyspecialsenses possessed bythat
creature, thoughyouareblindedanddeafened toyour
ownsurroundings,
BESTOW CURSE
3rd-/evel nccromancy
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, upto1minute
Youlouchacreature, andthatcreature mustsucceed
onaWisdomsavingthroworbecomecursed forthe
duration ofthespelLWhenyoucastthisspell,choose
thenature ofthecurse fromthefollowingoptions:
Chooseoneabilityscore.Whilecursed, thetarget
hasdisadvantage onabilitychecksandsavingthrows
madewiththatabilityscore.
Whilecursed, thetargethasdisadvantage onattack
rollsagainstyou.
Whilecursed, thetargetmustmakeaWisdomsav-
ingthrowatthestart ofeachofitsturns. lfitfails,it
wastes itsactionthatturn doingnothing.
Whilethetarget iscursed, yourattacks andspells
dealanextra ld8necroticdamage tothetarget.
Aremove cursespellendsthiseffect.AttheDM's
option,youmaychooseanalternative curse effect,but
itshouldbenomorepowerfulthanthosedescribed
above.TheDMhasfinalsayonsuchacurse's effect.
At Higher LeveIs. Ifyoucastthisspellusingaspell
slotof4thleveiorhigher,theduration isconcentration,
upto10minutes. Ifyouuseaspellslotof5thleveior
higher,theduration is8hours. Ifyouuseaspellslotof
7thlevelorhigher,theduration is24hours. Ifyouuse
a9thleveispellslot,thespelllasts untilitisdispelled.
Usingaspellslotof5thleveiorhighergrants aduration
thatdoesn't require concentration.
BIGBY'S HAND
5th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S,M(aneggshellanda
snakeskin glove)
Duration: Concentration, uptoIminute
YoucreateaLargehandofshimmering, translucent
forceinanunoccupied spacethatyoucanseewithin
range.Thehandlastsforthespell'sduration, andit
movesatyourcommand, mimickingthemovementsof
yourownhand.
ThehandisanobjectthathasAC20andhitpoints
equaltoyourhitpointmaximum. lfitdrops toOhit
points,thespellends.IthasaStrength of26(+8)anda
Dexterityof10(+0).Thehanddoesn't fillitsspaee.
Whenyoucastthespellandasabonusactiononyour
subsequent turns,youcanmovethehandupto60feet
andthencause oneofthefollowingeffectswithit.
Clenched Fist.Thehandstrikes onecreature or
objectwithin5feetofit.Makeameleespellattackfor
PART 3ISPELLSthehandusingyourgamestatistics. Onahit,thetarget
takes 4d8forcedamage.
Forceful Hand. Thehandattempts topushacreature
within5feetofitinadirection youchoose.Make
acheckwiththehand'sStrength contested bythe
Strength (Athletics)checkofthetarget.lfthetargetis
Mediumorsmaller,youhaveadvantage onthecheck.lf
yousucceed, thehandpushes thetargetupto5feetplus
anumber offeetequaltofivetimesyourspellcasting
abilitymodifier.Thehandmoveswiththetarget to
remain within5feetofit.
Grasping Hand. Thehandattempts tograppleaHuge
orsmaller creature within5feetofit.Youusethehand's
Strength scoretoresolvethegrapple.Ifthetargetis
Mediumorsmaller,youhaveadvantage onthecheck.
Whilethehandisgrappling thetarget,youcanusea
bonusactiontohavethehandcrush it.Whenyoudo
so,thetargettakes bludgeoning damage equalto2d6+
yourspellcasting abilitymodifier.
lnterposing Hand. Thehandinterposes itself
betweenyouandacreature youchooseuntilyougive
thehandadifferentcommand. Thehandmovestostay
betweenyouandthetarget,providingyouwithhalf
coveragainst thetarget.Thetargetcan'tmovethrough
thehand'sspaceifitsStrength scoreislessthanor
equaltothehand'sStrength score. IfitsStrength score
ishigherthanthehand'sStrength score,thetargetcan
movetowardyouthrough thehand'sspace,butthat
space isdifficuItterrain forthetarget.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof6thleveiorhigher,thedamage fromthe
clenched fistoptionincreases by2d8andthedamage
fromthegrasping handincreases by2d6foreachslot
leveIabove5th.
BLADE BARRIER
6th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, upto10minutes
Youcreate averticalwallofwhirling,razor-sharp blades
madeofmagicalenergy.Thewallappears withinrange
andlastsfortheduration. Youcanmakeastraight wall
upto100feetlong,20feethigh,and5feetthick,ora
ringedwallupto60feetindiameter, 20feethigh,and
5feetthick.Thewallprovidesthree-quarters coverto
creatures behindit,anditsspaceisdifficultterrain.
Whenacreature enters thewall'sarea forthefirst
timeonaturnorstarts itsturnthere,thecreature must
makeaDexteritysavingthrow.Onafailedsave.the
creature takes 6d1Oslashing damage. Onasuccessful
save,thecreature takes halfasmuchdamage.
BLADE WARD
Abjuratian cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: 1round
Vouextend yourhand and trace asigi!ofwarding inthe
air.Unti!the end ofyour nextturo. youhaveresistance
against bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage
dealt byweapon attacks.
BLESS
ls~levelenchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S,M(asprinkling ofholywater)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Voubless uptothree creatures ofyourchoicewithin
range. Whenever atarget makes anattack rollora
saving throw before the spell ends, the target can roll
ad4and add the number rolled totheattack rollor
saving throw.
At Higher LeveIs. When youcast this spell using
aspellslotof2ndleveIorhigher,youcan target one
additional creature foreach slotleveiabove 1st.
BLIGHT
4th.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Necromantic energy washes overacreature ofyour
choice thatyoucan see within range, draining moisture
and vitalityfromit.The target must make aConstitution
saving throw. The target takes 8d8 necrotic damage on
afailedsave,orhalfas muchdamage onasuccessful
one.This spell has noeffectonundead orconstructs.
lfyoutarget aplantcreature oramagical plant,it
makes the saving throw withdisadvantage, and the spell
deals maximum damage toit.
lfyou target anonmagical plant that isn't acreature,
such asatree orshrub, itdoesn't make asaving throw;
itsimplywithers and dies.
At Higher LeveIs. When youcast this spell using a
spell slotof5th leveiorhigher, thedamage increases by
Id8foreach slotleveIabove4th.
BLINDING SMITE
3rd.level evocation
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, upto1minute
The nexttimeyouhitacreature withameleeweapon
attack during this spell's duration, yourweapon flares
withbright light,and the attack deals anextra 3d8
radiant damage tothe target. Additionally,the target
must succeed onaConstitution saving throw orbe
blinded unti!the spell ends.
Acreature blinded bythis spell makes another
Constitution saving throw atthe endofeach ofitsturns.
Onasuccessful save,itisnolonger blinded.BLINDNESS/DEAFNESS
2nd.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30feet
Components: V
Duration: 1minute
Voucan blindordeafen afoe.Choose onecreature that
youcansee within range tomake aConstitution saving
throw. Ifitfails,the target iseither blinded ordeafened
(yourchoice)fortheduration. Attheend ofeachofits
turos, the target can make aConstitution saving throw.
Onasuccess, thespell ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When youcast this spell using
aspell slotof3rdleveiorhigher,youcan target one
additional creature foreach slotleveiabove2nd.
BLINK
3rd.level transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: 1minute
Rollad20 attheend ofeach ofyourturos forthe
duration ofthe spell.Onarollof11orhigher,you
vanish fromyourcurrent plane ofexistence and appear
inthe Ethereal Plane (thespell failsand the casting is
wasted ifyouwere already onthat plane).Atthe start of
your nextturo, and when the spellends ifyouare onthe
Ethereal Plane, youreturo toanunoccupied space of
yourchoice thatyoucan see within 10feetofthespace
youvanished from.lfnounoccupied space isavailable
within that range,youappear inthe nearest unoccupied
space (chosen atrandom ifmore than onespace is
equallynear).Voucan dismiss this spell asanaction.
Whileonthe Ethereal Plane, youcan see and hear
the planeyouoriginated from,which iscast inshades
ofgray,andyoucan't see anything there morethan 60
feetaway.Voucan onlyaffectand beaffected byother
creatures onthe Ethereal Plane. Creatures that aren't
there can't perceive youorinteract withyou,unless they
havetheabilitytodosO.
BLUR
2nd./evel illusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Yourbodybecomes blurred, shifting and wavering to
allwhocan seeYOU. Forthe duration, anycreature has
disadvantage onattack rollsagainst you.Anattacker
isimmune tothis effectifitdoesn't relyonsight,
as withblindsight, orcan see through illusions, as
with truesight.
BRANDING SMITE
2nd.level evocation
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: Self
PART 3 ISPELLS
2
19
Components: V
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
The nexl lime you hil acrealure wilh aweapon attack
before lhis spell ends, lhe weapon gleams wilh aslral
radiance as youslrike, The attack deals an exlra 2d6
radianl damage lolhe largel, which becomes visible if
il's invisibie, and lhe largel sheds dim lighl ina 5.fool
radius and can'l become invisible unlil lhe spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you casl lhis spell using
aspell slol of3rd leveior higher, lhe exlra damage
increases by ld6 foreach sI01leveiabove 2nd.
BURNING HANDS
1st.leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: Self (15-foot cone)
Components: V,S
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Asyou hold your hands wilh lhumbs louching and
fingers spread, alhin sheel offlames shools forlh from
your outslretched fingerlips. Each crealure ina 15-fool
cone musl make a Dexlerily saving lhrow. Acrealure
lakes 3d6 firedamage onafailed save, or half as much
damage on asuccessful one.
The fire ignites any flammable objecls inlhe area lhal
aren'l being woro or carried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you casl lhis spell using a
spell slol of2nd leveior higher, lhe damage increases by
ld6 foreach slol leveiabove 1st.
CALL LIGHTNING
3rd-IeveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 120feel
Components: V,S
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo 10minutes
Aslorm cloud appears in the shape ofacylinder lhal
is 10feet lall wilh a60.fool radius, cenlered on a poinl
you can see 100 feel direclly above you. The spell fails
ifyou can'l see apoinl inlhe air where lhe slorm cloud
could appear (forexample, ifyou are ina room lhal can't
accommodale lhe cloud).
When youcasl lhe spell, choose apoinl you can see
wilhin range. AbolI oflightning flashes down from lhe
cloud lOlhal point. Each crealure wilhin 5feel oflhal
point musl make aDexlerily saving throw. Acrealure
lakes 3d10lighlning damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on asuccessful one. On each ofyour
luros unlil lhe spell ends, you can use your aclion locall
down lighlning in lhis way again, largeting lhe same
poinl or adifferent one.
lfyou are ouldoors inslormy condilions when you
casl lhis spell, lhe spell gives you control over lhe
exisling slorm inslead ofcreating a new ooe. Under
such condilions, lhe spell's damage increases by ld10.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast lhis spell using a
spell si01of41hor higher levei, lhe damage increases by
IdlO foreach si01leveiabove 3rd.
CALM EMOTIONS
2nd.level enehantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60feet
Components: V.S
Duration: Concentration. upto 1minute
Vouattempt tosuppress strong emotions inagroup
ofpeople. Eaeh humanoid ina20-foot.radius sphere
eentered onapointyouchoose within range must make
aCharisma saving throw; acreature can choose to
failthis saving throw ifitwishes. [facreature failsits
saving throw. choose one ofthe followingtwoeffects.
Voucan suppress anyeffectcausing atarget tobe
charmed orfrightened. When this spell ends. any
suppressed effeetresumes. provided that itsduration
has notexpired inthe meantime.
Alternatively.youcan make atarget indifferent about
ereatures ofyourehoice that itishostile toward. This
indifference ends ifthe target isattaeked orharmed by
aspellor ifitwitnesses anyofitsfriends being harmed.
When the spell ends. the creature becomes hostile
again. unless the DMrules otherwise.
CHAIN LIGHTNING
6th.level evoeation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 150feet
Components: V.S. M(abitoffur;apiece ofamber.
glass. oracrystal rod;and three silver pins)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voucreate aboltoflightning that ares toward atarget of
your choice that youcan see within range. Three bolts
then leap fromthat target toas many as three other
targets. each ofwhich must bewithin 30feetofthe tirst
target. Atarget can beacreature oran objeet and ean
betargeted byonlyone ofthe bolts.
Atarget must make aDexterity saving throw. The
target takes lOd8lightning damage onafailedsave.or
halfas much damage onasuccessful one.
At Higher Leve/s. Whenyoucast this spell using
aspellslotof7thleveiorhigher. one additional bolt
leaps fromthe tirst target toanother target foreach slot
leveiabove6th.
CHARM PERSON
lst.level enehantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1hour
Vouattempt toeharm ahumanoid youcan see within
range. Itmust make aWisdom saving throw. and does
sowithadvantage ifyouoryourcompanions are tighting
it.[fitfailsthe saving throw. itischarmed byyouuntil
the spell ends oruntilyouoryour companions do
anything harmful toit.The charmed ereature regards
youas afriendly acquaintance. When the spell ends. the
creature knows itwas eharmed byyou.
At Higher Leveis. When youcast this spell using
aspell slotof2nd leveiorhigher.youcan target oneadditional creature foreach slot leveiabove 1sI.The
creatures must bewithin 30 feetofeach other when
youtarget them.
CHILL TOUCH
Neeromaneyeantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1round
Voucreate aghostly.skeletal hand inthe space ofa
creature within range. Makearanged spell attack
against the creature toassail itwith the chillofthe
grave.Onahit.the target takes ld8 necrotic damage.
and itcan't regain hitpoints until the start ofyour next
turnoUntilthen, the hand clings tothe target.
Ifyou hitan undead target. italso has disadvantage on
attack rollsagainst youuntil the end ofyour next turno
This spell's damage increases byld8 when youreach
5th levei(2d8). 11thleveI(3d8),and 17thlevei(4d8).
CHROMATIC ORB
1st.level evoeation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S.M(adiamond worth at least 50gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouhurl a4-ineh-diameter sphere ofenergy ata
creature that youcan see within range. Vouchoose
acid,cold.tire,lightning, poison, orthunder forthe type
oforbyoucreate. and then make aranged spell attack
against the target. lfthe attack hits. the creature takes
3d8 damage ofthe typeyouehose.
At Higher Leveis. When youcast this spell using a
spell slotof2nd leveIorhigher. the damage inereases by
ld8 foreach slotleveiabove 1st.
CIRCLE OF DEATH
6th-levei neeromaney
Casting Time: 1aetion
Range: 150feet
Components: V,S. M(thepowder ofaerushed black
pearl worth atleast 500 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
Asphere ofnegativeenergy ripples out ina60.foot-
radius sphere fromapointwithin range. Eaeh creature
inthat area must make aConstitution saving throw.A
target takes 8d6 necrotie damage onafailedsave.or
halfas much damage onasuccessful one.
At Higher Leve/s. When youcast this spell using a
spell slotof7thleveIorhigher. the damage increases by
2d6 foreach slotleveiabove6th.
CIRCLE OF POWER
5th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self(30-footradius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration. upto10minutes
PART 3 SP£LLS
221
222Divineenergy radiates fromyou,distorting and
diffusing magical energy within 30feetofyou.Until
the spell ends, the sphere moveswithyou,centered on
you.Fortheduration, each friendlycreature inthearea
(includingyou)has advantage onsaving throws against
spells and other magical effects.Additionally,when
anaffectedcreature succeeds onasaving throw made
against aspell ar magical effectthat allows ittomake a
saving throw totake onlyhalfdamage, itinstead takes
nodamage ifitsucceeds onthe saving throw.
CLAIRVOYANCE
3rd-/evel divination
Casting Time: 10minutes
Range: 1mile
Components: V,5, M(afocusworth atleast 100
gp,either ajeweled horn forhearing ar aglass
eyeforseeing)
Duration: Concentration, upto 10minutes
Voucreate aninvisiblesensor within range inalocation
familiar toyou(aplaceyouhavevisitedar seen before)
arinanobviouslocation that isunfamiliar toyou(such
as behind adoar,around acorner, arinagroveoftrees).
Thesensorremains inplace forthe duration, and it
can't beattacked ar otherwise interacted with.
When youcast the spell,youchoose seeing ar
hearing. Voucan use thechosen sense through the
sensorasifyouwere initsspace. Asyouraction,you
can switch between seeing and hearing.
Acreature that can see thesensor (suchasacreature
benefiting fromsee invisibilityartruesight) sees a
luminous, intangible orbabout thesize ofyourfist.
CLONE
8th-levei necromancy
Casting Time: 1hour
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M(adiamond worth atleast 1,000
gpand atleast I cubicinchoffleshofthe creature
that istobecloned,which thespell consumes, and a
vessel worth atleast 2,000 gpthat has asealable lid
and islargeenough toholdaMediumcreature, such
asahugeurn, coffin,mud-filledcystinthe ground, ar
crystal container filledwithsalt water)
Duration: !nstantaneous
This spell grows aninert duplicate ofalivingcreature
as asafeguard against death. This cloneforms inside
asealed vessel and grows tofullsizeand maturity
after 120days;youcan also choose tohavethe clone
beayounger version ofthe same creature. ltremains
inert and endures indefinitely,aslongas itsvessel
remains undisturbed.
Atanytimeafter theclone matures, iftheoriginal
creature dies, itssoul transfers tothe clone,provided
that the soul isfreeandwilling toreturnoThe cloneis
physicallyidentical tothe original and has thesame
personality, memories, and abilities, butnane ofthe
original's equipment. The original creature's physical
remains, iftheystillexist, become inert and can't
thereafter berestored tolife,since the creature's souI
iselsewhere.
PART 3 ISPELLSCLOUD OF DAGGERS
2nd-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M(asliverofglass)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Voufillthe airwithspinning daggers inacube 5feeton
each side, centered onapointyouchoose within range.
Acreature takes 4d4 slashing damage when itenters
the spell's area forthe firsttimeonaturn ar starts
itsturn there.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slotof3rd leveiar higher, the damage increases by
2d4 foreachslotleveiabove2nd.
CLOUDKILL
5th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Concentration, upto10minutes
Voucreate a20-foot-radius sphere ofpoisonous, yellow-
green fogcentered onapointyouchoose within range.
The fogspreads around corners. ltlasts forthe duration
ar untilstrong winddisperses the fog,ending the spell.
ltsarea isheavilyobscured.
When acreature enters thespell's area forthe first
time onaturn ar starts itsturn there, that creature must
make aConstitution saving throw.Thecreature takes
5d8poison damage onafailedsave,ar halfasmuch
damage onasuccessful one,Creatures are affected
eveniftheyholdtheir breath ar don'tneed tobreathe.
Thefogmoves 10feetawayfromyouatthestart
ofeach ofyourturns, rollingalong thesurface ofthe
ground. Thevapors, being heavier than air,sink tothe
lowest leveiofthe land,evenpouring down openings.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slotof6th levelar higher, thedamage increases by
ld8 foreachslot leveiabove5th.
COLOR SPRAY
Ist-/eveJiIIusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 5elf(15-footcone)
Components: V,5, M(apinch ofpowder orsand that is
colored red,yellow,and blue)
Duration: I round
Adazzling array offlashing, colored lightsprings from
yourhand. Roll6dlO;the totalishowmanyhitpoints
ofcreatures this spell can effect.Creatures ina 15-foot
cone originating fromyouare affectedinascending
arder oftheir current hitpoints (ignoring unconscious
creatures and creatures that can't see).
5tarting withthe creature that has the lowest current
hitpoints, each creature affected bythisspell isblinded
untilthe spell ends, 5ubtract each creature's hitpoints
fromthe totalbefore movingontothecreature with
the nextlowest hitpoints.Acreature's hitpoints must
beequal toorless than the remaining total forthat
creature tobeaffected,
At Higher Leve/s. When youcast this spell using a
spell slotof2ndleveIorhigher, rollanadditional 2dI O
foreach slotleveIabove 1st.
COMMAND
/st-/evel enchantment
Casting Time:Iaction
Range:60feet
Components: V
Duration:1round
Vouspeak aone-word command toacreature youcan
seewithin range. The target must succeed onaWisdom
saving throw orfollowthecommand onitsnextturno
The spell has noeffectifthetarget isundead, ifit
doesn't understand yourlanguage, orifyourcommand
isdirectly harmful toit.
Some typical commands and their effects follow.Vou
might issue acommand other than onedescribed here.
Ifyoudoso,theOMdetermines howthetarget behaves.
Ifthetarget can't followyourcommand, thespell ends.
Approach.The target moves toward youbythe
shortest and most direct route, ending itsturn ifit
moveswithin 5feetofYOU.
Drop.The target drops whatever itisholding and then
ends itsturno
F/ee.The target spends itsturn moving awayfrom
youbythefastest available means.
Grove/.The target fallsprone andthen ends itsturno
Ha/t.The target doesn't moveandtakes noactions.
Afiyingcreature stays aloft,provided that itisableto
dosO.Ifitmust movetostayaloft,itfiiesthe minimum
distance needed toremain intheair.
At Higher Leve/s. When youeast this spell using
aspell slotof2ndleveIorhigher,youcan affeetone
additional creature foreach slotlevelabove 1st.The
creatures must bewithin 30feetofeach other when
youtarget them.
COMMUNE
5th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time:1minute
Range:SeIf
Components:V,S,M(incense andaviaI ofholyor
unholywater)
Duration:1minute
Voucontact yourdeityoradivineproxyand askupto
three questions thatcan beanswered with ayesorno.
Voumust askyourquestions before thespell ends. Vou
receive acorrect answer foreach questiono
Oivinebeings aren't necessarily omniscient, soyou
might receive "unclear" asananswer ifaquestion
pertains toinformation that liesbeyond thedeity's
knowledge. Inacase where aone-word answer could be
misleading orcontrary tothedeity's interests, the OM
might offerashort phrase asananswer instead.
Ifyou cast thespell twoormore times before finishing
yournextlongrest, there isacumulative 25percent
chance foreach casting after thefirstthatyougetno
answer. The OMmakes this rollinsecret.
224COMMUNE WITH NATURE
5th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Voubriefty become one with nature and gain knowledge
ofthe surrounding territory. In the outdoors, the spell
gives you knowledge ofthe land within 3miles ofyou.
In caves and other natural underground settings, the
radius isIimited to300 feet. The spell doesn't function
where nature has been replaced byconstruction, such
as indungeons and towns.
Vouinstantly gain knowledge ofup tothree facts of
your choice about any ofthe following subjects as they
relate tothe area:
terrain and bodies ofwater
prevalent plants, minerais, animais, or peoples
powerful celestiaIs, fey,fiends, elementals, or undead
influence from other planes ofexistence
buildings
For example, you could determine the location of
powerful undead in the area, the location ofmajor
sources ofsafe drinking water, and the location ofany
nearby towns.
COMPELLED DUEL
1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vouattempt tocompel acreature into adueI. One
creature that you can see within range must make a
Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
drawn toyou, compelled byyour divine demando For
the duration, ithas disadvantage on attack rolls against
creatures other than you, and must make aWisdom
saving throw each time itattempts tomove toaspace
that ismore than 30 feet away from you; ifitsucceeds
on this saving throw, this spell doesn't restrict the
target's movement for that turno
The spell ends ifyou attack any other creature, ifyou
cast aspell that targets a hostile creature other than the
target, ifacreature friendly toyou damages the target or
casts aharmful spell on it,or ifyou end your turn more
than 30 feet away from the target.
COMPREHEND LANGUAGES
1st-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5, M(apinch ofsoot and salt)
Duration: 1hour
For the duration, you understand the literal meaning of
any spoken language that you hear. Voualso understand
any written language that you see, but you must be
touching the surface onwhich the words are written. It
takes about I minute toread one page oftext.
PAR1 3 ISPELLSThis speIl doesn't decode secret messages in atext
or aglyph, such as an arcane sigil, that isn't part ofa
written language.
COMPULSION
4th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Creatures ofyour choice that you can see within range
and that can hear you must make aWisdom saving
throw. Atarget automatically succeeds on this saving
throw ifitcan't be charmed. On a failed save, a target
isaffected bythis spelI. Until the speIl ends, you can
use abonus action on each ofyour turns todesignate a
direction that ishorizontal to YOU.Each affected target
must use as much ofits movement as possible to move
in that direction on its next turnoItcan take its action
before itmoves. After moving in this way,itcan make
another Wisdom saving totry toend the effect.
Atarget isn't compeIled tomove into an obviously
deadly hazard, such as afire or pit, but itwill provoke
opportunity attacks tomove inthe designated direction.
CONE OF COLD
5th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 5elf (60-foot cone)
Components: V,5, M(asmall crystal or glass cone)
Duration: Instantaneous
Ablast ofcold air erupts from your hands. Each
creature in a60-foot cone must make aConstitution
saving throw. Acreature takes 8d8 cold damage ona
failed save, or half as much damage on asuccessful one.
Acreature killed bythis spell becomes afrozen statue
until itthaws.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this speIl using a
spell slot of6th levelor higher, the damage increases by
ld8 foreach slot leveIabove 5th.
CONFUSION
4th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,5, M(three nut shells)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
This spell assaults and twists creatures' minds,
spawning delusions and provoking uncontrolled action.
Each creature ina lO-foot-radius sphere centered on
a point you choose within range must succeed on a
Wisdom saving throw when you cast this spell or be
affected byit.
An affected target can't take reactions and must roIl
adIO at the start ofeach ofits turns todetermine its
behavior forthat turno
dl0 Behavior
1 The creature uses ali its movement to move in a
random direction. To determine the direction, reli
a d8 and assign a direction to each die face. The
creature doesn't take an action this turno
2-6 The creature doesn't move or take actions this turno
7-8 The creature uses its action to make a melee attack
against a randomly determined creature within its
reach. If there is no creature within its reach, the
creature does nothing this turno
9-10 The creature can act and move normally.
At the end ofeach of its turns, an affected target can
make a Wisdom saving throw. lf it succeeds. this effect
ends for that target.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl this spell using a
spell slot of 5th levei or higher. the radius of the sphere
increases by 5 reet for each slot levei above 4th.
CONJURE ANIMALS
3rd-/evel eonjuratioll
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concenlration, up lo 1hour
Vousummon feyspirits lhal take the form of beasts and
appear in unoccupied spaces that you can see within
range. Choose one of the following options for what
appears:
One beast of challenge rating 2 or lower
Two beasts of challenge rating 1ar lower
Four beasts of challenge rating 1/2 or lower
Eight beasts ofehallenge rating 1/4 ar lower
Each beasl is also considered fey,and itdisappears
when it drops to Ohit points or when the spell ends.
The summoned creatures are friendly to you and your
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
as a group, which has its own turns. They obey any
verbal commands that you issue to them (no action
required byyou). Ifyou don't issue any commands to
them, they defend themselves from hostile creatures,
but otherwise take no actions.
The DM has the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher-Ievel spell slots, you choose one of the
summoning options above, and more creatures appear:
twice as many with a 5th-levei slot, three times as many
with a 7th-levei slot. and four times as many with a
9th-levei si 01.
CONJURE BARRAGE
3rd-/evel conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Sei f(60-foot cone)
Components: V,S, M(one piece of ammunition or a
thrown weapon)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouthrow a nonmagical weapon or fire a piece of
nonmagicaI ammunition into the air to create a coneof identical weapons that shoot forward and then
disappear. Each creature in a 60.foot cone must succeed
on a Dexterity saving throw. Acreature takes 3d8
damage on a failed save, ar half as much damage on a
successful one. The damage type is the same as that of
the weapon or ammunition used as a component.
CONJURE CELESTIAL
7th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
Vousummon a celestial ofchallenge rating 4 or lower,
which appears in an unoccupied space that you can see
within range. The celestial disappears when itdrops to
Ohit points or when the spell ends.
The celestial is friendly to you and your companions
for the duration. Roll initiative for the celestial, which
has its own turns. It obeys any verbal commands that
you issue to it(no action required byyou), as long as
they don't violate its alignment. Ifyou don't issue any
commands to the celestial, it defends itself from hostile
creatures but otherwise takes no actions.
The DM has the celestial's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast [his spell using a
9th-levei spell slot, you summon a celestial of challenge
rating 5 ar lower.
CONJURE ELEMENTAL
5th-levei cOlljuration
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S, M(burning incense for air, soft day
for earth, sulfur and phosphorus for fire, or water and
sand for water)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Voucall forth an elemental servant. Choose an area ofair,
earth, !ire, or water that fills a lO-foot cube within range.
An elemental of challenge rating 5 or lower appropriate
to the area you chose appears in an unoccupied space
within 10 feet of it. For example, a !ire elemental
emerges from a bonfire, and an earth elemental rises
up fram the ground. The elemental disappears when it
drops to Ohit points or when the spell ends.
The elemental is friendly to you and your companions
for the duration. Roll initiative for the elemental, which
has its own turns. lt obeys any verbal commands that
you issue to it (no action required byyou). Ifyou don't
issue any commands to the elemental, it defends itself
from hostile creatures but otherwise takes no actions.
Ifyour concentration is broken, the elemental doesn't
disappear. Instead, you lose control of the elemental,
ilbecomes hostile toward you and your companions,
and it might attack. An uncontrolled elemental can't
be dismissed byyou, and it disappears I hour after
you summoned it.
The DM has the elemental's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the challenge rating
increases by I for each slot levei above 5th.
PART 3ISPELLS
226CONJURE FEY
6th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
Vousummon afeycreatllre ofchallenge rating 6or
lower, or a feyspirit that takes the form ofabeast of
challenge rating 6or lower. ltappears inan unoccupied
space that you can see within range, The feycreature
disappears when itdrops to Ohit points or when
the spell ends,
The feycreature isfriendly toyou and your
companions forthe duration. Rollinitiative for the
creature, which has itsown turns. ltobeys any verhal
commands that you isslle toit(no action required
byyou),as long as they don't violate its alignment. If
you don't issue any commands tothe feycreature, it
defends itselffrom hostile creatures but otherwise
takes noactions.
Ifyour concentration isbroken, the feycreature
doesn't disappear. Instead, you lose contro! ofthe
feycreature, ithecomes hostile toward you and your
companions, and itmight attack. Anuncontrolled fey
creature can't be dismissed hyyou. and itdisappears 1
hour after you summoned it.
The DMhas the feycreature's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
aspell slot of7th leveIor higher, the challenge rating
increases by 1foreach slot leveiabove 6th.
CONJURE MINOR ELEMENTALS
4th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V.S
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vousummon elementals that appear in IInoccupied
spaces that you can see within range. Vouchoose one
the following options forwhat appears:
One elemental ofchallenge rating 2or lower
Twoelementals ofchallenge rating 1or lower
Four elementals ofchallenge rating 1/2or lower
Eight elementals ofchallenge rating 1/4or lower.
Anelemental summoned bythis spell disappears when
itdrops toOhit points or when the spell ends.
The summoned creatures are friendly toyou and your
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
as agroup. which has its own turns. They obey any
verbal commands that you issue tothem (noaction
required byyou). Ifyou don't issue any commands to
them, they defend themselves from hostile creatures,
hut otherwise take noactions.
The DMhas the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher.level spell slots, youchoose one ofthe
summoning options above, and more creatures appear:
twice as many with a6th-levei slot and three times as
many with an 8th-levei slot.
PART 3ISPEl.LSCONJURE VOLLEY
5th-levei conjumtion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 150feet
Components: V,S, M(one piece ofammunition or one
thrown weapon)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voufire apiece ofnonmagical ammunition fram a
ranged weapon or throw a nonmagical weapon into
the air and choose apoint within range. Hundreds of
duplicates ofthe ammunition or weapon fali inavolley
from above and then disappear. Each creature ina
40-foot-radius. 20.foot.high cylinder centered on that
point must make a Dexterity saving throw. Acreature
takes 8d8 damage on afailed save. or half as much
damage on asuccessful one. The damage type is the
same as that ofthe ammunition or weapon.
CONJURE WOODLAND BEINGS
4th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.S, M(one holly berry per
creature summoned)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1hour
Vousummon feycreatures that appear inunoccupied
spaces that you can see within range, Choose one ofthe
following options forwhat appears:
One feycreature ofchallenge rating 2or lower
Twofeycreatures ofchallenge rating 1or lower
Four feycreatures ofchallenge rating 1/2or lower
Eight feycreatures ofchallenge rating 1/4or lower
Asummoned creature disappears when itdrops to Ohit
points or when the spell ends.
The summoned creatures are friend!y toyou and your
companions. Rollinitiative forthe summoned creatures
as a group. which have their own turns. They obey any
verhal commands that you issue to them (no action
required hyyou). Ifyou don't issue any commands to
them, they elefendthemselves from hostile creatures,
but otherwise take noactions.
The DMhas the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher.level spell slots. you choose one ofthe
summoning options above, anelmore creatures appear:
twice as many with a 6th.level slot and three times as
many with an 8th.level slot.
CONTACT OTHER PLANE
5th.level divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: 1minute
Voumentally contact ademigod, the spirit ofalong.dead
sage, or some other mysterious entity fram another
plane. Contacting this extraplanar intelligence can
strain or even break your mind. When you cast this
spell, make a DC 15lntelligence saving thraw. On a
failure, you take 6d6 psychic damage and are insane
until you finish a long rest. While insane, you can't take
actions, can't understand what other creatures say, can't
read, and speak only in gibberish, A greater restoration
spell cast on you ends this effect.
On a successful save, you can ask the entity up to five
questions, Vou must ask your questions before the spell
ends, The DM answers each question with one word,
such as u
yes," "no," "maybe," "never/' "irrelevant." ar
"unclear" (if the entity doesn't know the answer to the
question), ]f a one-word answer would be misleading,
the DM might instead offer a short phrase as an answer,
CONTAGION
5th-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Component: V,S
Duration: 7 days
Your touch inflicts disease. Make a melee spell atlack
against a creature within your reach. On a hit, you aftlict
the creature with a disease of your choice from any of
the ones described below.
At the end of each of the target's turns, it must make
a Constitution saving throw. After failing three of
these saving throws, the disease's effects last for the
duration, and the creature stops making these saves.
After succeeding on three of these saving throws, the
creature recovers from the disease, and the spell ends.
Since this spell induces a natural disease in its
target, any effect that removes a disease or otherwise
ameliorates a disease's effects apply to it.
Blinding Sickness. Pain grips the creature's mind,
and its eyes turn milky white. The creature has
disadvantage on Wisdom checks and Wisdom saving
throws and is blinded,
FiJth Fever. A raging fever sweeps through the
creature's body. The creature has disadvantage on
Strength checks, Strength saving throws. and attack
rolls that use Strength.
Flesh Rot. The creature's flesh decays. The creature
has disadvantage on Charisma checks and vulnerability
to ali damage.
Mindfire. The creature's mind becomes feverish. The
creature has disadvantage on Intelligcnce checks and
Intelligence saving throws, and the creature behaves as
if under the effects of the confusion spell during combat.
Seizure. The creature is ovcrcomc with shaking.
The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity checks,
Dcxterity saving throws, and attack rolls that
use Dexterity.
Slimy Doom. The creaturc begins to bleed
uncontrollably. The creature has disadvantagc on
Constitution checks and Constitution saving throws.
In addition, whenever the creature takcs damage, it is
stunned until the end of its next turno
CONTINGENCY
6th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: SelfComponents: V,S, M (a statuetle of yourself carved
from ivory and decorated with gems worth at
least 1,500 gp)
Duration: 10 days
Choose a spell of 5th levei or lower that you can cast, that
has a casting time of 1 action, and that can target YOU.
Vou cast that spell-called the contingent spell-as part
of casting contingency, expending spell slots for both, but
the contingent spell doesn't come into effect. Instead, it
takes effect when a certain circumstance occurs. Vou
describe that circumstance when you cast the two spells.
For example, a contingency cast with water breathing
might stipulate that water breathing comes into effect
when you are engulfed in water or a similar liquid.
The contingent spell takes effect immediately after thc
circumstance is met for the first time, whether or not you
want it to, and then contingencyends.
The contingent spell takes effect only on you, even
if it can normally target others. Vou can use only one
contingency spell at a time. If you cast this spell again,
the effect of another contingency spell on you ends. Also,
contingency ends on you if its material component is
ever not on your person.
CONTINUAL FLAME
2nd./evel evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (ruby dust worth 50 gp, which the
spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
A flame, equivalent in brightness to a torch, springs
forth from an object that you touch. The cffect looks like
a regular flame, hut it creates no heat and doesn't use
oxygen. A continuaI liame can be covered or hidden but
not smothered or quenched.
CONTROL WATER
4th-leveI transnllltation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 300 fect
Components: V,S, M (a drop ofwater and a
pinch of dust)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Until the spell cnds, you control any frcestanding water
inside an arca you choose that is a cube up to 100 feet
on a side. Vou can choose from any of the following
effccts when you cast this spcll. As an action on your
turn, you can rcpeat the same effect or choosc a
different one.
Flood. Vou cause the water Icvel of ali standing water in
the area to rise by as much as 20 feet. If the area includes
a shore, the flooding water spills over onto dry land.
If you choose an area in a large body of water. you
instead create a 20-foot tall wave that travels from one
side of the area to the other and then crashes down. Any
Huge or smaller vehiclcs in the wave's path are carried
with it lo the other side. Any Huge or smaller vehicles
struck by the wave have a 25 percent chance of capsizing.
The water levei remains elevated until the spell ends
or you choose a different effect. Ifthis effect produced
PART 3 SPEI L~
227
228
.---a wave, the wave repeats on the start ofyour next turn
while the fiood effect lasts.
Part Water. Voucause water in the area to move
aparl and creale a lrench. The trench extends across
the spell's area, and the separaled waler forms a wall lo
either side. The lrench remains unlil lhe spell ends or
you choose a different effect. The waler lhen slowly fills
in lhe trench over lhe course of the next round until the
normal water levei is restored.
Redirect FIow. Vou cause fiowing water in the area
to move in a direction you choose, even if the water has
to fiow over obstacles, up walls, or in other unlikely
directions. The water in the area moves as you direct
it, but once it moves beyond the spell's area, it resumes
its fiow based on the terrain conditions. The water
continues to move in the direction you chose until the
spell ends or you choose a different effect.
WhirIpooI. This effect requires a body of water
at least 50 feet square and 25 feet deep. Voucause
a whirlpool to form in the center of the area. The
whirlpool forms a vortex that is 5 feet wide at the
base, up to 50 feet wide ai the top, and 25 feel tall. Any
creature or object in the water and within 25 feet of the
vortex is pulled 10 feet toward it. Acreature can swim
away from the vortex by making a Strength (Athletics)
check against your spell save DC.
When a creature enters the vortex for the first time on
a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a Strength
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 2d8
bludgeoning damage and is caught in the vortex until
the spell ends. On a successful save, the creature takes
half damage, and isn't caught in the vortex. Acrealure
caught in the vortex can use its action to try to swim
away from the vortex as described above, but has
disadvanlage on lhe Strength (Athletics) check to do so.
The first time each turn that an object enters the
vortex, the object takes 2d8 bludgeoning damage; this
damage occurs each round it remains in the vortex.
CONTROL WEATHER
8th.level transmutation
Casting Time: lO minutes
Range: Self (5-mile radius)
Components: V,S, M(burning incense and bits of earth
and wood mixed in water)
Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours
Vou take control of the weather within 5 miles ofyou
for the duration. Vou must be outdoors to cast this spell.
Moving to a place where you don't have a clear path to
the sky ends the spell early.
When you cast the spell, you change the current
weather conditions, which are determined by the DM
based on the climate and season. Voucan change
precipitation, temperature, and wind. lt takes Id4 x 10
minutes for the new conditions lOtake effect. Once they
do so. you can change the conditions again. When the
spell ends, the weather gradually returns to normal.
When you change the weather conditions, find a
current condition on the following tables and change its
stage by one, up or down. When changing the wind, you
can change its direction.
PART 3 ISPELLSPRECIPITATION
Stage Condition
1 Clear
2 Light clouds
3 Overcast or ground fog
4 Rain, hail, or snow
5 Torrential rain, driving hail, or blizzard
TEMPERATURE WIND
Stage Condition Stage Condition
1Unbearable heat 1Calm
2Hot 2Moderate wind
3Warm 3Strong wind
4Cool 4Gale
5Cold 5Storm
6Arctic cold
CORDON OF ARROWS
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 5 feet
Components: V,S, M(four or more arrows or bolts)
Duration: 8 hours
Vou plant four pieces of nonmagical ammunition-
arrows or crossbow bolts-in the ground within range
and lay magic upon them to protect an area. Until the
spell ends, whenever a creature other than you comes
within 30 feet of the ammunition for the first time on a
turn or ends its turn there, one piece of ammunition fiies
up to strike it. The creature must succeed on a Dexterity
saving throw or take Id6 piercing damage. The piece of
ammunition is then destroyed. The spell ends when no
ammunition remains.
When you cast this spell, you can designate any
creatures you choose, and the spell ignores them.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the amount of
ammunition that can be affected increases by two for
each slot levei above 2nd.
COUNTERSPELL
3rd.level abjuration
Casting Time: I reaction, which you take when you see
a creature within 60 feet ofyou casting a spell
Range: 60 feet
Components: S
Duration: Instantaneous
Voualtempt to interrupt a creature in the process of
casting a spell. lf the creature is casting a spell of 3rd
levei or lower, its spell fails and has no effect. lf it is
casting a spell of 4th leveI or higher, make an ability
check using your spellcasting ability. The DC equals 10
+the spell's leveI. On a success, the creature's spell fails
and has no effect.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the interrupted spell has
no effect if its levei is less than or equal to the levei of the
spell slot you used.
CREATE FOOD AND WATER
3rd-Ievel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Voucreate 45 pounds offood and 30 gallons ofwater
on the ground or incontainers within range, enough
tosustain up totifteen humanoids or tivesteeds for
24 hours. The food isbland but nourishing, and spoils
ifuneaten after 24 hours. The water isclean and
doesn't gobad.24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature
before the current 24-hour period ends. This use
ofthe spell reasserts your control over up tothree
creatures you have animated with this spell, rather than
animating new ones.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
7th-leveI spell slot, youcan animate or reassert control
over four ghouls. When you cast this spellusing an
8th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or reassert control
over tiveghouls or two ghasts or wights. When you cast
this spell using a 9th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or
reassert control over six ghouls, three ghasts or wights,
or two mummies.
Using any material created bythis spell as another
spell's material component causes that spell tofail.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of6th leveior higher, the cube increases by5
feet foreach slot leveIabove 5th.
CROWN OF MADNESS
2nd-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
One humanoid ofyour choice that you can see within
range must succeed onaWisdom saving throw or
become charmed byyou for the duration. While
the target ischarmed inthis way,atwisted crown
ofjagged iron appears on its head, and a madness
glows inits eyes.
The charmed target must use its action before moving
on each ofits turns tomake amelee attack against a
creature other than itself that you mentally choose.CREATION
5th-levei il/usion
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(atiny piece ofmatter ofthe same
type ofthe item you plan tocreate)
Duration: Special
Voupull wisps ofshadow material from the Shadowfell
tocreate a nonliving object ofvegetable matter within
range: 50ftgoods. rope, wood, or something similar. Vou
can also use this spell tocreate mineral objects such as
stone, crystal, or metal. The object created must be no
larger than a 5-foot cube, and the object must be ofa
form and material that you have seen before.
The duration depends on the object"s material. If
the object iscomposed ofmultiple materiaIs, use the
shortest duration.CREATE OR DESTROY WATER
1st-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(adrop ofwater ifcreating water
or afewgrains ofsand ifdestroying it)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voueither create or destroy water.
Create Water. Voucreate up to 10gallons ofclean
water within range inan open container. Alternatively,
the water falls as rain in a30-foot cube within range,
extinguishing exposed fiames inthe area.
Destroy Water. Voudestroy upto 10gallons ofwater
inan open container within range. Alternatively, you
destroy fogin a30-foot cube within range.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of2nd leveior higher, you create or destroy
10additional gallons ofwater, or the size ofthe cube
increases by5feet, foreach slot leveIabove 1st.
CREATE UNDEAD
6th-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 10feet
Components: V,S, M(one clay pot tilled with grave dirt.
one clay pot tilled with brackish water, and one 150gp
black onyx stone foreach corpse)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voucan cast this spell only at nighl. Choose up tothree
corpses ofMedium or Small humanoids within range.
Each corpse becomes aghoul under your control. (The
DMhas game statistics for these creatures.)
As abonus action on each ofyour turns, you can
mentally command any creature you animated with
this spell ifthe creature iswithin 120 feet ofyou (ifyou
control multiple creatures, you can command any or ali
ofthem at the same time, issuing the same command to
each one).Voudecide what action the creature will take
and where itwill move during its next turn, oryou can
issue ageneral command, such as toguard a particular
chamber or corridor. Ifyou issue nocommands, the
creature only defends itself against hostile creatures.
Once given an order, the creature continues tofollowit
until its task iscomplete.
The creaturc isunder your control for 24 hours,
after which itstops obeying any command you have
given il.Tomaintain control ofthe creature foranotherMaterial
Vegetable matter
Stone ar crystal
Precious metais
Gems
Adamantine ar mithralDuration
1day
12 hours
1 hour
laminutes
1minute
PART 3 SPELLS
229
230The target can act normally on its turn ifyou choose no
creature or ifnone are within its reach.
On your subsequent turns, you must use your action to
maintain control over the target, or the spell ends. AIso,
the target can make a Wisdom saving throw at the end
ofeach ofits turns. On a success. the spell ends.
CRUSADER'S MANTLE
3rd-Ievel evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Holypower radiates from you in an aura with a 30-foot
radius, awakening boldness in friendly creatures. Until
the spell ends, the aura moves with you, centered on
you. While in the aura, each nonhostile creature in the
aura (including you) deals an extra Id4 radiant damage
when ithits with a weapon attack.
CURE WOUNDS
1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Acreature you touch regains a number ofhit points
equal to Id8 +your spellcasting ability modifier. This
spell has no effect on undead or constructs.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of2nd levei or higher, the healing increases by
Id8 foreach slot leveIabove IsI.
DANCING LIGHTS
Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(abit ofphosphorus or wychwood,
or a glowworm)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Voucreate up to four torch-sized lights within range,
making them appear as torches, lanterns, or glowing
orbs that hover in the air forthe duration. Voucan
also combine the four Iights into one glowing vaguely
humanoid form ofMedium size. Whichever form you
choose, each light sheds dim light in a lO-foot radius.
As a bonus action onyour turn, you can move the
lights up to60 feet toa new spot within range. AIight
must be within 20 feet ofanother light created bythis
spell, and a light winks out ifitexceeds the spell's range.
DARKNESS
2nd-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,M(bat fur and a drop ofpitch or
piece ofcoai)
Duration: Concentration, up to lOminutes
Magical darkness spreads from a point you choose
within range to filla IS-foot-radius sphere forthe
PART 3ISPELLSduration. The darkness spreads around corners.
Acreature with darkvision can't see through this
darkness, and nonmagical light can't illuminate il.
Ifthe point you choose is on an object you are holding
or one that isn't being worn or carried, the darkness
emanates from the object and moves with il.Completely
covering the source ofthe darkness with an opaque
object, such as a bowl or a heIm, blocks the darkness.
]fany ofthis spell's area overlaps with an area oflight
created bya spell of2nd leveior lower, the spell that
created the light isdispelled.
DARKVISION
2nd-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V.S, M(either a pinch ofdried
carrot or an agate)
Duration: 8 hours
Voutouch awilling creature to grant itthe ability to
see in the dark. For the duration. that creature has
darkvision out to a range of60 feel.
DAYLIGHT
3rd-Ievel evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: I hour
A60-foot-radius sphere oflight spreads out from a point
you choose within range. The sphere isbright light and
sheds dim light for an additional 60 feel.
]fyou chose a point on an object you are holding or
one that isn't being worn or carried, the light shines
from the object and moves with it.Completely covering
the affected object with an opaque object, such as a bowl
or a helm, blocks the light.
Ifany ofthis spell's area overlaps with an area of
darkness created bya spell of3rd leveior lower, the
spell that created the darkness is dispelled.
DEATH WARD
4th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: 8 hours
Voutouch a creature and grant ita measure of
protection from death.
The first time the target would drop to Ohit points as a
result oftaking damage, the target instead drops to I hit
point, and the spell ends.
Ifthe spell isstill in effect when the target is subjected
to an effect lhat would kill itinstantaneously without
dealing damage, that effect isinstead negated against
the target, and the spell ends.
DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL
7th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: ISOfeel
Components: V,S, M(aliny ball ofbal
guano and sulfur)
Duralion: Concenlralion, up lOI minule
Abeam ofyellow lighl lIashes from your poinling finger,
then condenses lolinger aIachosen poinl wilhin range
as aglowing bead forthe duralion. When lhe spell
ends, either because your concentration isbroken OI'
because you decide toend it,lhe bead blossoms with a
lowroar inlo an explosion ofliame Ihal spreads around
corners. Each crealure ina 20.fool.radius sphere
centered on that point must make a Dexterity saving
throw. Acrealure lakes fire damage equal tolhe total
accumulated damage on afailed save, OI'half as much
damage on asuccessful one.
The spell's base damage is 12d6. Ifat the end of
your lurn lhe bead has not yet detonated, lhe damage
increases by Id6.
]fthe glowing bead istouched before the interval
has expired, lhe creature touching itmust make a
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the spell ends
immediately, causing the bead 10erupt inliame. On a
successful save, the crealure can throw the bead up to
40 fee!.When itstrikes acreature 01'asolid objecl, the
spell ends, and lhe bead explodes.
The fire damages objecls in the area and ignites
lIammable objecls that aren'l being worn OI'carried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using
aspell slot of8th leveIOI'higher, lhe base damage
increases byId6 foreach sI01leveIabove 71h.
DEMIPLANE
8th./evel conjuratian
Casling Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: S
Duralion: I hour
Voucreate ashadowy door on alIatsolid surface that
you can see within range. The door islarge enough to
allow Medium creatures lopass through unhindered.
When opened, lhe door leads loademiplane Ihat
appears tobe an empty room 30 feet ineach dimension,
made ofwood 01'stone. When the spell ends, the door
disappears, and any crealures 01'objects inside the
demiplane remain trapped Ihere, as lhe door also
disappears from the olheI' side.
Each time you casl this spell, you can create a new
demiplane, OI'have the shadowy doar connect toa
demiplane you created with a previous casting ofthis
spell. Additionally, ifyou know the nature and contents
ofademiplane created bya casting ofthis spell by
another creature, youcan have lhe shadowy door
connecl toits demiplane inslead.
DESTRUCTIVE WAVE
5thJevelevocation
Casling Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Componenls: V
Duration: InslantaneousVouslrike the ground, creating aburst ofdivine
energy that ripples oulward f tomyou. Each creature
you choose within 30 feet ofyou must succeed on a
Conslitution saving throw OI'take 5d6 thunder damage,
as well as 5d6 radiant OI'necrotic damage (your choice),
and be knocked prone. Acreature that succeeds on
itssaving throw takes half as much damage and isn't
knocked prone.
DETECT EVIL ANO Gooo
1st-IeveIdivination
Casting Time: I aclion
Range:Se]f
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
For the duralion, you know ifIhere isan aberration,
celestial, elemenlal, fey,fiend, OI'undead within 30
feet ofyou, as well as where lhe crealure islocated.
Similarly, you know ifthere isaplace 01'object within
30 feet ofyou Ihat has been magically consecrated
OI'desecrated.
The spell can penetrate most barriers, but itisblocked
by I foolofslone, I inch ofcommon metal, athin sheel
oflead, OI'3feel ofwood OI'dir!.
DETECT MAGIC
1st-leveI divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
For the duration, you sense the presence ofmagic
wilhin 30 feet ofyou. ]fyousense magic inIhis way,you
can use your action tosee afaint aura around anyvisible
creature OI'object inthe area that bears magic, and you
learn itsschool ofmagic. ifany.
The spell can penetrate most barriers, but itisblocked
byI footofslone, I inch ofcommon metal, aIhin sheel
oflead, OI'3feet ofwood OI'dir!.
DETECT POISON ANO DISEASE
1st-leveIdivination (ritual)
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(ayew leaf)
Duration: Concenlration, up to 10minutes
For the duration, you can sense the presence and
location ofpoisons, poisonous creatures, and diseases
within 30 feel ofyou. Voualso identify the kind of
poison, poisonous creature, ar disease in each case.
The spell can penelrate most barriers, but itisblocked
byI footofslone, I inch ofcommon metal, a thin sheet
oflead, OI'3feet ofwood OI'dir!.
DETECT THOUGHTS
2nd.level divination
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(acopper piece)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
PART 3 SPELLS
23
1
For the duration, you can read the thoughts ofcertain
creatures, When you cast the spell and as your action on
each turn until the spell ends, you can focus your mind
on any one creature that you can see within 30 feet of
you, Ifthe creature you choose has an Intelligence of
3 or lower or doesn't speak any language, the crealure
is unaffected.
Vouinitially learn the surface thoughts ofthe
creature-what is most on its mind in that moment. As
an action, you can either shift your atlention lo another
creature's thoughts or atlempt to probe deeper into the
same creature's mind. ]fyou probe deeper, the target
must make a Wisdom saving throw. Ifit fails, you gain
insight into its reasoning (ifany), its emotional state,
and something that looms large in ils mind (such as
something itworries over, loves, or hates). ]fitsucceeds,
the spell ends. Either way, the target knows that you are
probing into its mind, and unless you shift your atlention
to another creature's thoughts, the creature can use
its action on its turn to make an lntelligence check
contested byyour Intelligence check; ifitsucceeds,
the spell ends.
Questions verbally directed at the target creature
naturally shape the course of its thoughts, so this spell
is particularly effective as part ofan interrogation.
Voucan also use this spell to detect the presence of
thinking creatures you can't see. When you cast the
spell or as your action during the duration, you can
search for thoughts within 30 feet ofYOU. The spell can
penetrate barriers, but 2 feet ofrock, 2 inches ofany
metal other than lead, or a thin sheet of lead blocks you.
Voucan't detect a creature with an lntelligence of 3 or
lower or one that doesn't speak any language.
Once you detecI the presence ofa creature in this way,
you can read its lhoughts for the rest ofthe duration as
described above, even ifyou can't see it, but itmust still
be within range.
DIMENSION DOOR
4th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 500 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouteleport yourself from your current location lo any
other spot within range. Vouarrive at exactly the spot
desired. Itcan be a place you can see, one you can
visualize, or one you can describe bystating distance
and direclion, such as "200 feet straight downward" or
"upward to the northwest at a 45-degree angle, 300 feet."
Voucan bring along objects as long as their weight
doesn't exceed what you can carry. Voucan also bring
one willing creature ofyour size or smaller who is
carrying gear up to its carrying capacity. The creature
must be within 5 feet ofyou when you cast this spell.
Ifyou would arrive in a place already occupied byan
object or a creature, you and any creature traveling with
you each take 4d6 force damage, and the spell fails to
teleport you.DISGUISE SELF
1st-levei iIIusion,
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: 1hour
Voumake yourself-including your clothing, armor,
weapons, and other belongings on your person-Iook
different until the spell ends ar until you use your action
to dismiss it.Voucan seem 1foot shorter or taller and
can appear thin, fat,or in belween. Voucan't change
your body type, so you must adopt a form that has the
same basic arrangement of limbs. Otherwise, the extent
ofthe illusion is up toyou.
The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up lo
physical inspection. For example, ifyou use this spell
to add a hat toyour oUlfit,objects pass through the hat,
and anyone who touches itwould feel nothing or would
feelyour head and hair. Ifyou use this spell to appear
thinner than you are, lhe hand ofsomeone who reaches
out lOtouch you would bump into you while itwas
seemingly still in midair.
Todiscern that you are disguised, a creature can use
its action to inspect your appearance and must succeed
on an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell save De.
DISINTEGRATE
6th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(a lodestone and a pinch ofdust)
Duration: lnstantaneous
Athin green ray springs from your pointing finger to a
target that you can see within range. The target can be a
creature, an objecl, or a creation ofmagical force, such
as the wall created by wallofforce.
Acreature targeted by this spell must make a
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes
IOd6 +40 force damage. Iflhis damage reduces the
target to Ohit points, it is disintegrated.
Adisintegrated creature and everything ilis wearing
and carrying, except magic ilems, are reduced to a pile
of fine gray dust. The creature can be restored to life
only bymeans ofa true resurrection or awishspell.
This spell automatically disintegrates a Large or
smaller nonmagical object or a creation ofmagical
force. ]fthe target is a Huge or larger object or creation
offorce, this spell disintegrates a lO-foot-cube portion of
it.Amagic item is unaffecled by this spell.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th leveIor higher, the damage increases by
3d6 for each slot levei above 6th.
DISPEL EVIL AND GOOD
5th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: SeIf
PARr3 SPELL
234Components: V,S, M(holywater or powdered
silver and iron)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Shimmering energy surrounds and protects you from
fey,undead, and creatures originating from beyond the
Material Plane. For the duration, celestiais, elementals,
fey,fiends, and undead have disadvantage on attack
rolls against you.
Voucan end the spell early byusing either ofthe
following special functions.
Break Enchantment. Asyour action, you touch a
creature you can reach that ischarmed, frightened, or
possessed bya celestial, an elemental, afey,a fiend,
or an undead. The creature you touch isno longer
charmed, frightened, or possessed bysuch creatures.
DismissaI. Asyour action, make amelee spell attack
against a celestial, an elemental, afey,a fiend, or an
undead you can reach. On a hit,you attempt todrive
the creature back toits home plane. The creature must
succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be sent back to
its home plane (ifitisn't there already). Ifthey aren't on
their home plane, undead are sent tothe Shadowfell,
and feyare sent tothe Feywild.
DISPEL MAGIe
3rd-Ievel abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Choose one creature, object, or magical effect within
range. Anyspell of3rd leveior lower on the target ends.
For each spell of4th leveior higher on the target. make
an ability check using your spellcasting ability. The
DCequals 10 +the spell's leveI.On asuccessful check,
the spell ends.
At HigherLeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of4th levelor higher, you automatically end
the effec!s ofaspell on the target ifthe spell's levei is
equal toor less than the leveiofthe spell slot you used.
DISSONANT WHISPERS
1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouwhisper a discordam melody that only one creature
ofyour choice within range can hear, wracking itwith
terrible pain. The target must make aWisdom saving
throw. On afailed save, ittakes 3d6 psychic damage and
must immediately use its reaction, ifavailable, tomove
as far as its speed allows away from you. The creature
doesn'tInoveinto obviously dangerous ground, such
as a fire or apit.On asuccessful save, the target takes
half as much damage and doesn't have tomove away.A
deafened creature automatically succeeds on the save.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of2nd levelor higher. the damage increases by
Id6 foreach slot leveiabove 1st.
P"Rf 3 SPELLSDIVINATION
4th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(incense and asacrifieial offering
appropriate toyour religion, together worth at least 25
gp,which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Yourmagic and an offering put you incontact with
agod or agod's servants. Vouask asingle question
concerning aspeeific goal, event, or activity tooccur
within 7days. The DMoffers a truthful reply.The reply
might be ashort phrase, acryptic rhyme, or an omen.
The spell doesn't take into account any possible
circumstances that might change the outcome, such
as the casting ofadditional spells or the loss or gain
ofacompanion.
Ifyou cast the spell two or more times before finishing
your next long rest, there isacumulative 25 percent
chance foreach casting after the first that you get a
random reading. The DMmakes this roll insecret.
DIVINE FAVOR
1st-Ievel evocarion
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Your prayer empowers you with divine radiance. Until
the spell ends, your weapon attacks deal an extra 1d4
radiant damage on ahit.
DIVINE WORD
7th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: 30 fee!
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Youutter adivine word, imbued with the power thar
shaped the world at the dawn ofereation. Choose any
number ofcreatures you can see within range. Each
creature that can hear you must make a Charisma
saving throw. On a failed save, acreature suffers an
effect based on its current hit points:
50 hit points or fewer: deafened for 1minute
40 hit points or fewer: deafened and blinded for 10
minutes
30 hit points ar fewer: blinded, deafened, and stunned
for 1hour
20 hit points or fewer: killed instantly
Regardless ofits current hit points, acelestial, an
elemental, a fey.or a fiend that fails its save isforced
back toits plane oforigin (ifitisn't there already) and
can't return toyour current plane for 24 hours byany
means short ofa wishspell.
DOMINATE BEAST
4th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vouattempt tobeguile a beast that you can see within
range. lt must succeed on aWisdom saving thraw or be
charmed byyou forthe duration. ]fyou or creatures that
are friendly toyou are fighting it,ithas advantage on the
saving thraw.
While the beast ischarmed, you have a telepathic link
with itas long as the two ofyouare on the same plane
ofexistence. Voucan use this telepathic link toissue
commands to the creature while you are conscious (no
action required), which itdoes itsbest toobey.Voucan
specifya simple and general course ofaction, such as
"Attack that creature." "Run over there," or "Fetch that
objec!." Ifthe creature completes the order and doesn't
receive further direction from you, itdefends and
preserves itself tothe best ofits ability.
Voucan use your action totake total and precise
contraI ofthe targe!. Until the end ofyour next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
do anything that you don't allow ittodo. During this
time, you can also cause the creature touse areaction,
but this requires you touse your own reaction as well.
Each time the target takes damage, itmakes anew
Wisdom saving thraw against the spell. ]fthe saving
throw succeeds, the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell with a
5th.level spell slot, the duration isconcentration, up
to 10minutes. When you use a6th.level spell slot,
the duration isconcentration, upto I hour. When you
use aspell slot of7th leveior higher, the duration is
concentration, up to8hours.
DOMINATE MONSTER
8th.level enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vouattempt tobeguile acreature that you can see
within range. lt must succeed on aWisdom saving
throw or be charmed byyou forthe duration. Ifyou or
creatures that are friendly toyou are fighting it,ithas
advantage on the saving throw.
While the creature ischarmed, you have a telepathic
link with itas long as the two ofyou are on the same
plane ofexistence. Voucan use this telepathic link to
issue commands tothe creature while you are conscious
(noaction required), which itdoes its best toobey. Vou
can specify asimple and general course ofaction, such
as "Attack that creature," "Run over there," or "Fetch
that object." Ifthe creature completes the order and
doesn't receive further direction from you, itdefends
and preserves itself tothe best ofits ability.
Voucan use your action totake total and precise
contraI ofthe targe!. Until the end ofyour next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
doanything that you don't allow ittodo. During this
time, you can also cause the creature touse areaction,
but this requires you touse your own reaction as well.Each time the target takes damage, itmakes a new
Wisdom saving throw against the spell. Ifthe saving
throw succeeds, the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell with
a9th.level spell slot, the duration isconcentration,
up to8hours.
DOMINATE PERSON
5th.level enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vouattempt tobeguile a humanoid that you can see
within range. lt must succeed on aWisdom saving
throw or be charmed byyou forthe duration. Ifyou or
creatures that are friendly toyou are fighting it,ithas
advantage on the saving throw.
While the target ischarmed, you have a telepathic link
with itas long as the two ofyou are on the same plane
ofexistence. Voucan use this telepathic link toissue
commands tothe creature while you are conscious (no
action required), which itdoes its best toobey. Voucan
specify asimple and general course ofaction, such as
"Attack that creature," "Run over there," or "Fetch that
object." Ifthe creature completes the order and doesn't
receive further direction from you, itdefends and
preserves itself tothe best ofits ability.
Voucan use your action to take total and precise
contrai ofthe targe!. Until the end ofyour next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
do anything that you don't allow ittodo. During this
time youcan also cause the creature to use areaction,
but this requires you touse your own reaction as well.
Each time the target takes damage, itmakes anew
Wisdom saving throw against the spell. Ifthe saving
throw succeeds, the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using
a6th.level spell slot, the duration isconcentration,
up to 10minutes. When you use a 7th.level spell slot,
the duration isconcentration, up to I hour. When you
use aspell slot of8th levei or higher, the duration is
concentration, up to8hours.
DRAWMIJ'S INSTANT SUMMONS
6th.level conjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: I minute
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5,M(asapphire worth 1,000 gp)
Duration: Until dispelled
Voutouch an object weighing 10pounds or less whose
longest dimension is6feet or less. The spellleaves an
invisible mark on its surface and invisibly inscribes the
name ofthe item on the sapphire you use as the material
componen!. Each time you cast this spell, you must use
adifferent sapphire.
Atany time thereafter, you can use your action to
speak the item's name and crush the sapphire. The item
instantly appears inyour hand regardless ofphysical or
planar distances, and the spell ends.
PART 3 SPELLS235
]f another creature is holding or carrying the item,
crushing the sapphire doesn't transport the item to you,
but instead you learn who the creature possessing the
object is and roughly where that creature is located
at that moment.
Dispel magic or a similar effect successfully applied to
the sapphire ends this spell's effect.
DREAM
5th-leveI iIIusion
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 5pecial
Components: V,5, M (a handful of sand, a dab of ink,
and a writing quill plucked from a sleeping bird)
Duration: 8 hours
This spell shapes a creature's dreams. Choose a
creature known to you as the target of this spell. The
target must be on the same plane of existence as you.
Creatures that don't sleep, such as elves, can't be
contacted by this spell. Vou, or a willing creature you
touch, enlers a trance state, acting as a messenger.
While in the trance, the messenger is aware of his or
her surroundings, but can't take actions or move.
If the target is asleep, the messenger appears in the
target's dreams and can converse with the target as
long as it remains asleep, through the duration of the
spell. The messenger can also shape the environment
of the dream, creating landscapes. objects, and other
images. The messenger can emerge from the trance at
any time, ending the effect of the spell early. The target
recalls the dream perfectly upon waking. If the target is
awake when you cast the spell, the messenger knows it,
and can either end the trance (and the spell) or wait for
the target to fali asleep, at which point the messenger
appears in the target's dreams.
Vou can make the messenger appear monstrous
and terrifying to the target. If you do, the messenger
can deliver a message of no more than ten words and
then the target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On
a failed save, echoes of the phantasmal monstrosity
spawn a nightmare that lasts the duration of the target's
sleep and prevents the target from gaining any benefit
from that rest. In addition, when the target wakes up, it
takes 3d6 psychic damage.
If you have a body part, lock of hair, c1ipping from a
nail, or similar portion of the target's body, the target
makes its saving throw with disadvantage.
DRUIDCRAFT
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Whispering to the spirits of nature, you create one of the
following effects within range:
Vou create a tiny, harmless sensory effect that predicts
what the weather will be at your location for the next
24 hours. The effect might manifest as a golden orb
PA RT 3 ISPELI.Sfor c1ear skies, a c10ud for rain, falling snowflakes for
snow, and so on. This effect persists for I round.
Vou instantly make a flower blossom, a seed pod open,
or a leaf bud bloom.
Vou create an instantaneous, harmless sensory effect,
such as falling leaves, a puff of wind, the sound of a
small animal, or the faint odor of skunk. The effect
must fit in a 5-foot cube.
Vou instantly light or snuff out a candle, a torch, or a
small campfire.
EARTHQUAKE
8th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 500 feet
Components: V,5, M (a pinch of dirl, a piece of rock,
and a lump of c1ay)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou create a seismic disturbance at a point on the
ground that you can see within range. For the duration,
an intense tremor rips through the ground in a
100-foot-radius circ1e centered on that point and shakes
creatures and structures in contact with the ground
in that area.
The ground in the area becomes difficult terrain.
Each creature on the ground that is concentrating must
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the
creature's concentration is broken.
When you cast this spell and at the end of each turn
you spend concentrating on it, each creature on the
ground in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature is knocked prone.
This spell can have additional effects depending on
the terra in in the area, as determined by the DM.
Fissures. Fissures open throughout the spell's area at
the start of your next turn after you cast the spell. A total
of Id6 such fissures open in locations chosen by the DM.
Each is IdlO x 10 feet deep, la feet wide, and extends
from one edge of the spell's area to the opposite side.
A creature standing on a spot where a fissure opens
must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or fali in. A
creature that sllccessfully saves moves with the fissure's
edge as it opens.
A fissure that opens beneath a structure causes it to
automatically collapse (see below).
Structures. The tremor deals 50 bludgeoning damage
to any structure in contact with the ground in the area
when you cast the spell and at the start of each of your
turns until the spell ends. ]f a structure drops to Ohit
points, it collapses and potentially damages nearby
creatures. A crealure within half the distance of a
structure's height must make a Dexterity saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature takes 5d6 bludgeoning
damage, is knocked prone, and is buried in the rubble,
requiring a DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check as an
action to escape. The DM can adjust the DC higher
or lower, depending on the nalure of the rubble. On
a successful save, the creature takes half as much
damage and doesn't fali prone or become buried.
ELDRITCH BLAST
Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,5
Duration: lnstantaneous
Abeam ofcrackling energy streaks toward acreature
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the
target. Ona hit,the target takes ldlO forcedamage.
The spell creates more than one beam when you reach
higher leveis:two beams at 5th levei,three beams at
11th levei,and fourbeams at 17thleveI.Voucan direct
the beams at the same target or atdifferent ones. Make
aseparate attack rollforeach beam.
ELEMENTAL WEAPON
3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,5
Duration: Concentration, upto 1hour
Anonmagical weapon youtouch becomes a magic
weapon. Choose one ofthe followingdamage types:
acid, cold,tire, Iightning, or thunder. For the duration,
the weapon has a+1bonus toattack rolls and deals an
extra ld4 damage ofthe chosen type when ithits.
At Higher LeveIs. When youcast this spell using a
spell slot of5th or 6th leveI.the bonus toattack rolls
increases to+2and the extra damage increases to
2d4. When you use aspell slot of7th leveiar higher,
the bonus increases to+3and the extra damage
increases to3d4.
ENHANCE ABILITY
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M(furar afeather from abeast)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1hour.
Voutouch acreature and bestow upon ita magical
enhancement. Choose one ofthe followingeffects;the
target gains that effectuntil the spell ends.
Bear's Endurance. The target has advantage on
Constitution checks. ltalso gains 2d6 temporary hit
points, which are lostwhen the spell ends.
BulJ's Strength. The target has advantage
on 5trength checks, and his or her carrying
capacity doubles.
Cat'sGrace. The target has advantage on Dexterity
checks. ltalso doesn't take damage from falling 20 feet
or less ifitisn't incapacitated.
Eagle's Splendor. The target has advantage on
Charisma checks.
Fox's Cunning. The target has advantage on
Intelligence checks.
Owl's Wisdom. The target has advantage on
Wisdom checks.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of3rd leveIor higher, youcan target one
additional creature foreach slot leveIabove 2nd.ENLARGE/REDUCE
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5, M(apinch ofpowdered iron)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Voucause acreature or an object youcan see within
range togrow larger orsmaller fortheduration. Choose
either acreature ar an object that isneither worn
nor carried. Ifthe target isunwilling, itcan make a
Constitution saving throw. Onasuccess, the spell
has noeffect.
Ifthe target isacreature, everything itiswearing and
carrying changes size with it.Anyitem dropped byan
affected creature returns tonormal size at once.
Enlarge.The target's size doubles inalidimensions,
and itsweight ismultiplied byeight. This growth
increases itssize byone category-from Medium to
Large, forexample. Ifthere isn't enough room forthe
target todouble itssize. the creature or object attains
the maximum possible size inthe space available.
Untilthe spell ends, the target also has advantage on
5trength checks and 5trength saving throws. The
target's weapons also grow tomatch itsnewsize. While
these weapons are enlarged, the target's attacks with
them deal ld4 extra damage.
Reduce.The target's size ishalved inalidimensions,
and itsweight isreduced toone-eighth ofnormal. This
reduction decreases itssize byone category-from
Medium to5mall, forexample. Untilthe spell ends,
the target also has disadvantage on5trength checks
and 5trength saving throws. The target's weapons also
shrink tomatch its newsize. While these weapons are
reduced, the target's attacks with them deal ld4 less
damage (this can't reduce the damage below 1).
ENSNARING STRIKE
1st-leveIconjuration
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: 5elf
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
The next time you hitacreature with aweapon attack
before this spell ends, awrithing mass ofthorny vines
appears at the point ofimpact, and the target must
succeed ona5trength saving throw ar be restrained by
the magical vines until the spell ends. ALarge ar larger
creature has advantage onthis saving throw. Ifthe
target succeeds onthe save, the vines shrivel away.
While restrained bythis spell,thetarget takes ld6
piercingdamage atthestart ofeachofitsturns. Acreature
restrained bythevinesorone lhat can touchthecreature
can use itsaction tomake a5trength check against your
spell save De. Onasuccess, the target isfreed.
At Higher LeveIs. Ifyou cast this spell using aspell
slot of2nd leveior higher, the damage increases byld6
foreach slotleveiabove 1sI.
PART 3 ISPlI LS237
ENTANGLE
1st.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Grasping weeds and vines sprout framthe ground ina
20-footsquare starting from a point within range. For
the duration, these plants turo the ground inthe area
intodifficultterrain.
Acreature inthe area when youcast the spell must
succeed ona Strength saving throw ar be restrained
bythe entangling plants until the spell ends. Acreature
restrained bythe plants can use itsaction tomake
a Strength check against your spell save De. Ona
success, itfrees itself.
When the spell ends, the conjured plants wiltaway.
ENTHRALL
2nd.level enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1minute
Vouweavea distracting string ofwords, causing
creatllres ofyour choice that youcan see within range
and that can hear you tomake aWisdom saving
throw. Anycreature that can't becharmed succeeds
on this saving throw automatically, and ifyou orYOllr
companions are fighting acreature, ithas advantage on
the save. Onafailed save, the target has disadvantage
onWisdom (Perception) checks made toperceive any
creature other than you until the spell ends oruntil the
target can nolonger hear YOll.The spell ends ifyouare
incapacitated or can nolonger speak.
ETHEREALNESS
7th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Upto8 hours
Voustep into the border regions ofthe Ethereal Plane,
inthe area where itoverlaps withyour current plane.
Vouremain inthe Border Ethereal forthe duration or
until youuse your action todismiss the spell. During
this time,you can moveinanydirection. Ifyou move
upor down, every footofmovement costs an extra fool.
Voucan see and hear the plane YOlloriginated from,but
everything there looks gray,and youcan't see anything
more than 60 feetaway.
While onthe Ethereal Plane, youcan onlyaffectand
be affected byother crealures onthal plane. Creatures
that aren't onthe Elhereal Plane can't perceive youand
can't interact withyou,unless aspecial abilityar magic
has giventhem the abilitytodoso.
Youignore aliobjects and effects lhat aren't onthe
Ethereal Plane, allowing youtomovethrough objects
you perceive onthe plane youoriginated from.
PART 3 ISPELLSWhen the spell ends, youimmediately returo tothe
plane youoriginated from inlhe spot youcurrently
occupy. Ifyouoccupy the same spot as asolid object
or creature when this happens, you are immediately
shunted tothe nearest unoccupied space that you
can occupy and take forcedamage equal totwice lhe
number offeetyouare moved.
This spell has noeffectifyoucast ilwhile youare on
the Ethereal Plane or aplane that doesn't border it,such
as one ofthe Outer Planes.
At Higher Leve1s. When you cast this spell using
aspell slol of81hleveIor higher, youcan target upto
three willing crealures (including you)foreach slotlevei
above 7th.The creatures musl bewithin 10feetofyou
when youcast the spell.
EVARD'S BLACK TENTACLES
4th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S, M(apiece oftentacle from agiant
octopus or agiant squid)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Squirming, ebony tentades filla 20.foot square on
ground that youcan see within range. Forthe duration,
these tentacles turo lhe ground inthe area into
difficultterrain.
When acreature enlers the affected area forthe first
time onaturo or starts itsturo lhere, the creature
must succeed ona Dexterity saving throw or take 3d6
bludgeoning damage and be restrained bythe tentacles
until the spell ends. Acreature that starts itsturo inthe
area and isalready restrained bythe tentacles lakes 3d6
bludgeoning damage,
Acreature reslrained bythe tentacles can use ils
action lomake a Strength ar Dexterity check (itschoice)
against your spell save DC.Ona success, itfrees itself.
EXPEDITIOUS RETREAT
1st-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, uplo 10minutes
This spell allows youtomoveat an incredible pace.
When youcast this spell, and then as a bonus action
oneach ofyour turos unlil the spell ends, youcan take
the Dash action.
EYEBITE
6th.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
For the spell's duration, your eyes becomean inkyvoid
imbued with dread power.One creature ofyour choice
within 60 feet ofyou lhat you can see must succeed
onaWisdom saving throw or beaffected byone ofthe
followingeffectsofyour choice forthe duralion. On
each ofyour turns until the spell ends, you can use
your aclion to target auother creature but can't target
a creature agaiu ifit has succeeded on a saving throw
against this casting of eyebite,
As/eep. The targel falls unconscious, lt wakes up if it
takes any damage nr if another creature uses its action
to shake the sleeper awake,
Panicked. The target is frightened ofyou. On each
of its lurns, the frightened creature must take the
Dash action and move away from you by the safest and
shortest available route, unless there is nowhere to
move. lf the target moves to a place at least 60 feet away
from you where it can no longer see you, this effect ends.
Sickened. The target has disadvantage ou attack rolls
and ability checks. At the end of each of its turns, it can
make another Wisdom saving throw. lf it succeeds,
the effect ends.
FABRICATE
4th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: lO minutes
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou convert raw materiais into products of the same
material. For example, you can fabricate a wooden
bridge from a c1ump of trees, a rope from a patch of
hemp, and C10thesfrom flax or wool.
Choose raw materiais that you can see wilhin range.
Voucan fabricale a Large or smaller object (contained
within a lO-fool cube. ar eight connected 5-foot cubes),
given a sufficient quantity of raw material. Ifyou
are working with metal. stone, or anolher mineral
substance, however, the fabricated object can be no
larger than Medium (coutained within a single 5-foot
cube). The quality of objects made by the spell is
commensurate with the quality of the raw materiais.
Creatures or magic items can't be created or
transmuted by this spell. Voualso can't use it to
create items that ordinarily require a high degree of
craftsmanship, such as jewelry, weapons. glass, or
armor, unless you have proficiency with the type of
artisan's tools used to craft such objects.
FAERIE FIRE
1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Each object in a 20-foot cube within range is outlined in
blue, green, or violet light (your choice). Any creature in
the area when lhe spell is cast is also outlined in light if
it fails a Dexterity saving throw. For lhe duration, objects
and affected creatures shed dim light in a 10.fool radius.
Any attack roll against an affected creature or object
has arlvantage if the attacker can see it, and the affected
creature or object can't benefit from being invisible.FALSE LIFE
1st-levei necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(a small amount of alcohol or
distilled spirits)
Duration: I hour
Bolstering yourself with a necromantic facsimile of life,
you gain Id4 +4 temporary hit points for the rluration.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you gain 5 adrlitional
temporary hit points for each slollevel above 1st.
FEAR
3rd-level iIIusion
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot cone)
Components: V,S, M(a white feather or the
heart of a hen)
Duration: Concentration, up lo 1minule
Vou project a phantasmal image of a creature's worst
fears. Each creature in a 30-foot cone must succeed on
a Wisdom saving throw or rlrop whatever it is holrling
anrl beco me frightened for the duration.
While frightened by this spell, a creature must take
the Dash action and move away from you by lhe safest
available route on each of its turns, unless there is
nowhere to move. If the creature enrls its turn in a
location where it doesn't have line of sight to you,
the creature can make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
successful save, the spell enrls for that creature.
FEATHER FALL
1st-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I reaction, which you take when you or a
creature within 60 feet of YOIIfalls
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,M(a sma 11feather or piece of down)
Duration: I minute
Choose up to fivefalling creatures within range. A
falling creature's rate of descent slows to 60 feet per
round until the spell ends. lf the creature lands before
the spell ends, it takes no falling damage and can land
on its feel, and the spell ends for that creature.
FEEBLEMIND
8th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: ISO feet
Components: V,S, M(a handful of c1ay,crystal, glass,
or mineral spheres)
Durat;on: Instantaneous
Vou hlast the mind of a crealure that you can see within
range, altempting to shatter its intellect and personality.
The target takes 4d6 psychic damage and must make an
Intelligence saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature's Intclligence and
Charisma scores become I. The creature can't cast
spells, activate magic items, understand language, or
P\kT3 l'L
communicate in any intelligible way. The creature can,
however, identify its friends, follow them, and even
protect them.
At the end of every 30 days, the creature can repeat
its saving throw against this spell. If it succeeds on its
saving throw, the spell ends.
The spell can also be ended by greater restoration,
heal,orwish.
FEIGN DEATH
3rd-Ievel necromancy (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M(a pinch of graveyard dirt)
Duration: 1hour
Vou touch a willing creature and put it into a cataleptic
state that is indistinguishable from death.
For the spell's duration, or until you use an action
to touch the target and dismiss the spell, the target
appears dead to ali outward inspection and to spells
used to determine the target's status. The target is
blinded and incapacitated, and its speed drops to O.
The target has resistance to ali damage except psychic
damage. If the target is diseased or poisoned when you
cast the spell, or becomes diseased or poisoned while
under the spell's effect, the disease and poison have no
effect until the spell ends.
FINO FAMILIAR
1st-levei conjuratian (ritual)
Casting Time: I hour
Range: 10 feet
Components: V,5, M (10 gp worth af charcaal,
incense, and herbs that must be consumed by fire in a
brass brazier)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vougain the service of a familiar, a spirit that takes an
animal form you choose: bat, cat, crab, frog (toad), hawk,
lizard, octopus, owl, poisonous snake, fish (quipper),
rat, raven, sea horse, spider, or weasel. Appearing in
an unoccupied space within range, the familiar has the
statistics of the chosen form, though it is a celestial, fey,
or fiend (your choice) instead of a beast.
Your familiar acts independently ofyou, but it always
obeys your commands. In combat, it rolls its own
initiative and acts on its own turno Afamiliar can't
attack, but it can take other actions as normal.
When the familiar drops to Ohit points, it disappears,
leaving behind no physical formo It reappears after you
cast this spell again
While your familiar is within 100 feet ofyou, you
can communicate with it telepathically. Additionally,
as an action, you can see through your familiar's eyes
and hear what it hears until the start ofyour next turn,
gaining the benefits of any special senses that the
familiar has. During this time, you are deaf and blind
with regard to your own senses.
As an action, you can temporarily dismiss your
familiar. It disappears into a pocket dimension where it
awaits your summons. Alternatively, you can dismiss it
forever. As an action while it is temporarily dismissed,
PART 3 SPELLSyou can cause it to reappear in any unoccupied space
within 30 feet of YOU.
Voucan't have more than one familiar at a time. Ifyou
cast this spell while you already have a familiar, you
instead cause it to adopt a new formo Choose one of the
forms from the above list. Your familiar transforms into
the chosen creature.
Finally, when you cast a spell with a range of touch,
your familiar can deliver the spell as if it had cast the
spell. Your familiar must be within 100 feet ofyou, and
it must use its reaction to deliver the spell when you cast
it. If the spell requires an attack roll, you use your attack
modifier for the roll.
FINO STEEO
2nd-levei conjuration
Castiog Time: 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5
Duratioo: Instantaneous
Vousummon a spirit that assumes the form of an
unusually intelligent, strong, and loyal steed, creating a
long-Iasting bond with it. Appearing in an unoccupied
space within range, the steed takes on a form that you
choose, such as a warhorse, a pony, a camel, ao elk, or
a mastiff. (Your DM might allow other animais to be
summoned as steeds.) The steed has the statistics of the
chosen form, though it is a celestial, fey,or fiend (your
choice) instead of its normal type. Additionally, ifyaur
steed has an Intelligence of 5or iess, its Intelligence
becomes 6, and it gains the ability to understaod one
laoguage ofyour choice that you speak.
Your steed serves you as a mount, both in combat and
out, and you have an instinctive bond with it that allows
you to fight as a seamless unit. While mounted on your
steed, you can make any spell you cast that targets only
you also target your steed.
Wheo the steed drops to Ohit points, it disappears,
leaving behind no physical formoVoucan also
dismiss your steed at any time as an action, causing
it to disappear. In either case, casting this spell
again summons the same steed, restored to its hit
point maximum.
While your steed is within 1 mile ofyou, you can
communicate with it telepathically.
You can't have more than one steed bonded by this
spell at a time. As an action, you can release the steed
from its bond at any time, causing it to disappear.
FINO THE PATH
6th-levei divination
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5, M(a set of divinatory tools-such
as bones, ivory sticks, cards, teeth, or carved runes-
worth 100 gp and an object from the location you
wish to find)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day
This spell allows you to find the shortest, most direct
physical route to a specific fixed location that you are
familiar with on the same plane of existence. Iryou
name a destination on another plane of existenee, a
destination that moves (sueh as a mobile fortress), or a
destination that isn't specilie (sueh as "a green dragon's
lair"), the spell fails.
For the duration, as long as you are on the same plane
of existenee as the destination, you know how far it is
and in what direetion it lies. While you are traveling
there, whenever you are presented with a ehoiee of
paths along the way,you automatieally determine whieh
path is the shortest and most direet route (but not
neeessarily the safest route) to the destination.
FIND TRAPS
2nd-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Yousense the presenee of any trap within range that
is within line of sight. Atrap, for the purpose of this
spell, includes anything that would inflict a sudden or
unexpeeted effeet you eonsider harmful or undesirable,
which was speeilieally intended as sueh by its ereator.
Thus, the spell would sense an area affeeted bythe
alarmspell, aglyph of warding, or a meehanieal pit trap,
but it would not reveal a natural weakness in the floor,
an unstable eeiling, or a hidden sinkhole.
This spell merely reveals that a trap is present. You
don't learo the loeation of eaeh trap, but you do learo the
general nature of the danger posed by a trap you sense.
FINGE R OF DEATH
7th-leveI neeromaney
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Yousend negative energy coursing through a ereature
that you ean see within range, causing itsearing pain.
The target must make a Constitution saving throw. It
takes 7d8+30 necrotic damage on a failed save, or half
as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
Ahumanoid killed by this spell rises at the start of
your next turo as a zombie that is permanently under
your command, following your verbal orders to the best
of its ability.
FIREBALL
3rd~evelevoeaUon
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V,S, M(a tiny ball of bat
guano and sulfur)
Duration: Instantaneous
Abright streak flashes from your pointing linger to a
point you ehoose within range and then blossoms with
a low roar into an explosion of flame. Each creature
in a 20-foot-radius sphere eentered on that point must
make a Dexterity saving throw. Atarget takes 8d6 /ire
-damage on a failed save, or half as mueh damage on a
sueeessful one,
The /ire spreads around eorners. It ignites flammable
objeets in the area that aren't being worn or earried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of4th levei or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for eaeh slot levei above 3rd.
FIRE BOLT
Evoeation eantrip
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou hurl a mote of /ire at a ereature or objeet within
range. Make a ranged spell attaek against the
targel. On a hit, the target takes IdlO /ire damage. A
flammable objeet hit by this spell ignites if it isn't being
worn or earried.
This spell's damage inereases by IdlO when you reaeh
5th levei (2dlO), 11th levei (3d10),and 17th levei (4dlO).
FIRE SHIELD
4th./evel evoeation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5, M(a bit ofphosphorus or a /irefly)
Duration: 10 minutes
Thin and wispy flames wreathe your body for the
duration, shedding bright light in a 10.foot radius and
dim light for an additional lO feel. Vouean end the spell
early byusing an aetion to dismiss il.
The flames provide YOllwith a warm shield or a ehill
shield, as you ehoose. The warm shield grants you
resistanee to eold damage, and the ehill shield grants
you resistanee to /ire damage.
In addition, whenever a ereature within 5 feet ofyou
hits you with a melee attaek, the shield erupts with
flame. The attaeker takes 2d8 /ire damage from a warm
shield, or 2d8 eold damage from a eold shield.
FIRE STORM
7th./evel evoeation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 150 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Astorm made up of sheets of roaring flame appears
in a loeation you ehoose within range. The area of the
storm eonsists of up to ten 10.foot eubes, whieh you ean
arrange as you wish. Eaeh eube must have at least one
faee adjaeent to the faee of another eube. Eaeh ereature
in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw. It
takes 7d10 /ire damage on a failed save, or half as mueh
damage on a sueeessful one.
The /ire damages objeets in the area and ignites
flammable objeets that aren't being worn or earried.
Ifyou ehoose, plant life in the area is unaffeeted
by this spell.
PART 3 ISPELLSFLAME BLADE
2nd./evel evoeation
Casting Time: I bonus aetion
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5, M(leaf of sumae)
Duration: Coneentration, up to 10 minutes
Vouevoke a /iery blade in your free hand. The blade is
similar in size and shape to a seimitar, and it lasts for
the duration. lfyou let go of the blade, itdisappears, but
YOllean evoke the blade again as a bonus aetion.
Vouean use your aetion to make a melee spel1
attaek with the /iery blade. On a hit, the target takes
3d6 /ire damage.
The flaming blade sheds bright light in a 10.foot
radills and dim light for an additional 10feel.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spel1 lIsing a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for every two slot leveIs above 2nd.
FLAME STRIKE
5th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M(pineh of sulfur)
Duration: Instantaneous
Avertieal column of divine /ire roars down from the
heavens in a loeation YOllspecify. Eaeh ereature in
a lO.foot.radius, 40.foot-high cylinder eentered on a
point within range must make a Dexterity saving throw.
Aereature takes 4d6 /ire damage and 4d6 radiant
damage on a failed save, or half as mueh damage on a
sueeessful one.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spel1 using a
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the /ire damage or the
radiant damage (your ehoice) inereases by Id6 for eaeh
slot levei above 5th.
FLAMING SPHERE
2nd-levei eonjuration
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.5, M(a bit oftallow, a pineh of
brimstone, and a dusting ofpowdered iran)
Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
A 5-foot.diameter sphere of /ire appears in an
unoeeupied spaee ofyour ehoice within range and lasts
for the duration. Any ereature that ends its turn within 5
feet of the sphere must make a Dexterity saving thraw.
The ereature takes 2d6 /ire damage on a failed save, or
half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
As a bonus aetion, you ean move the sphere up to 30
feel. Ifyou ram the sphere into a ereature, that ereature
must make the saving throw against the sphere's
damage, and the sphere stops moving this turno
When you move the sphere, you ean direet it over
barriers up to 5 feet tall and jump it aeross pits up to
lO feet wide. The sphere ignites flammable objeets not
being worn or earried, and it sheds bright light in a
20.foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 feel.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof3rdleveiorhigher,thedamage increases by
Id6foreachslotleveiabove2nd.
FLESH TO STONE
6th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 60feet
Components: V,S,M(apinchoflime,water,andearth)
Duration: Concentration, uptoIminute
Vouattempt toturoonecreature thatyoucanseewithin
rangeintostone.Ifthetarget's bodyismadeofflesh,the
creature mustmakeaConstitution savingthrow.Ona
failedsave,itisrestrained asitsAeshbeginstoharden.
Onasuccessful save,thecreature isn'taffected.
Acreature restrained bythisspellmustmakeanother
Constitution savingthrowattheendofeachofitsturos.
lfitsuccessfully savesagainst thisspellthree times, the
spellends.Ifitfailsitssavesthree times,itisturoed
tostoneandsubjected tothepetrifiedcondition forthe
duration. Thesuccesses andfailuresdon'tneedtobe
consecutive;keeptrackofbothuntilthetargetcollects
threeofakind.
lfthecreature isphysicallybrokenwhilepetrified,
itsuffersfromsimilar deformities ifitreverts toits
originalstate.
lfyoumaintain yourconcentration onthisspellforthe
entirepossible duration, thecreature isturoed tostone
untiltheeffectisremoved.
FLY
3rd-Ievel transmutation
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: Touch
Components: V,S,M(awingfeatherfromanyblrd)
Duration: Concentration, upto10minutes
Voutouchawillingcreature. Thetargetgainsaflying
speedof60feetfortheduration. Whenthespellends,
thetargetfallsifitisstillaloft,unless ItcanstopthefalI.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusing
aspellslotof4thleveIorhigher,youcantargetone
additional creature foreachslotleveiabove3rd.
FOG CLOUD
1st-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, uptoIhOllr
Voucreatea20-foot-radiussphereoffogcentered ona
pointwithinrange.Thesphere spreads around coroers,
anditsarea isheavilyobscured. Itlastsfortheduration
oruntilawindofmoderate orgreater speed(atleast 10
milesperhour)disperses it.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof2ndleveiorhigher,theradius ofthefog
increases by20feetforeachslotleveiabove1st.FORBIDDANCE
6th-leveI abjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: 10mlnutes
Range: Touch
Components: V,S,M(asprinkling ofholywater,rare
incense,andpowdered rubyworthatleast 1,000gp)
Duration: Iday
Voucreateawardagainst magicaltraveIthatprotects
upto40,000 square feetoffloarspacetoaheightof30
feetabovethefloor.Fortheduration, creatures can't
teleportintotheareaoruseportais. suchasthose
created bythe gatespell.toenterthearea.Thespell
proofstheareaagainst planar travei,andtherefore
preventscreatllres fromaccessing thearea bywayof
theAstralPlane, Ethereal Plane, Feywild,Shadowfell,
ortheplane shiftspell.
Inaddition,thespelldamages typesofcrealures thal
youchoosewhenyoucastit.Chooseoneormoreofthe
following:celestiaIs, elementals, fey,fiends,andundead.
Whenachosencreature enlers thespell'sareaforlhe
firsllime onaturo orslarls itslurothere,thecreature
takes 5d1Oradianl ornecroticdamage (yourchoice
whenyoucastthisspell).
Whenyoucastthisspell,youcandesignate a
password. Acreature thatspeaks thepassword asit
enters thearea takesnodamage fromthespell.
Thespell'sareacan'toverlapwiththearea ofanother
forbiddancespell.Ifyoucast forbiddanceeverydayfor
30daysinthesamelocation,thespelllastsuntilItis
dispelled, andthematerial components areconsumed
onthelastcasting.
FORCECAGE
7th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 100feet
Components: V,S,M(rubydllstworth 1,500gp)
Duration: IhOllr
Animmobile,invisible,cube-shaped prisoncomposed of
magicalforcesprings intoexistence around anareayou
choosewithinrange.Theprison canbeacageorasolid
box,asyouchoose.
Aprisonintheshape ofacagecanbeupto20feeton
asideandismadefrom1/2-inchdiameterbarsspaced
1/2inchapart.
Aprisonintheshape ofaboxcanbeupto10feeton
aside,creating asolidbarrier thatpreventsanymatter
frompassing throllghitandblockinganyspellscastinto
oroutfromthearea.
Whenyoucastthespell,anycreature thatis
completelyinsidethecage'sareaistrapped. Creatures
onlypartiallywithinthearea,orthosetoolargetofit
Insidethearea,arepushed awayfromthecenterofthe
areauntiltheyarecompletelyoutsidethearea.
Acreature insidethecagecan'tleaveItbynonmagical
means, Ifthecreature triestouseteleportation or
interplanar traveitoleavethecage,itmustfirstmakea
Charisma savingthrow.Onasuccess, thecreature can
PART3 SPELLS
use that magic toexit the cage. Ona failure, the creature
can't exit the cage and wastes the use ofthe spell or
effecl.The cage also extends into the Ethereal Plane,
blocking ethereal traveI.
This spell can't be dispelled by dispel magic.
FORESIGHT
9th-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M(ahummingbird feather)
Duration: 8 hours
Voutouch a willing creature and bestow a limited ability
to see into the immediate future. For the duration, the
target can't be surprised and has advantage on attack
rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. Additionally,
other creatures have disadvantage on attack rolls
against the target for the duration.
This spell immediately ends ifyou cast itagain before
its duration ends.
FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT
4th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M(aleather strap, bound around the
arm or a similar appendage)
Duration: 1hour
Voutouch a willing creature. For the duration, the
target's movement is unaffected bydifficultterrain, and
spells and other magical effects can neither reduce
the target's speed nor cause the target to be paralyzed
or restrained.
The target can also spend 5 feet ofmovement to
automatically escape from nonmagical restraints, such
as manacles or a creature that has itgrappled. Finally,
being underwater imposes no penalties on the target's
movement or attacks.
FRIENDS
Enchantmentcantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 5elf
Components: 5, M(asmall amount ofmakeup applied
to the face as this spell is cast)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
For the duration, you have advantage on ali Charisma
checks directed at one creature ofyour choice that isn't
hostile toward you. When the spell ends, the creature
realizes that you used magic to influence its mood
and becomes hostile toward you. Acreature prone
to violence might attack you. Another creature might
seek retribution in other ways (at the DM'sdiscretion),
depending on the nature ofyour interaction with il.
GASEOUS FORM
3rd-IeveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
PART 3 ISPELLSComponents: V,5. M(abitofgauze and a
wisp ofsmoke)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
Voutransform a willing creature you touch, along with
everything it's wearing and carrying, into a misty cloud
forthe duration. The spell ends ifthe creature drops to
Ohit points. An incorporeal creature isn't affected.
While in this form, the target's only method of
movement is a flyingspeed of 10feel. The target can
enter and occupy the space ofanother creature. The
target has resistance to nonmagical damage, and ithas
advantage on 5trength, Dexterity, and Constitution
saving throws. The target can pass through small holes,
narrow openings, and even mere cracks, though ittreats
liquids as though they were solid surfaces. The target
can't fali and remains hovering in the air even when
stunned or otherwise incapacitated.
While in the form ofa misty cloud, the target can't talk
or manipulate objects, and any objects itwas carrying or
holding can't be dropped, used, or otherwise interacted
with. The target can't attack or cast spells.
GATE
9th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M(adiamond worth at least 5.000 gp)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Vouconjure a portallinking an unoccupied space you
can see within range to a precise location on a different
plane ofexistence. The portal is a circular opening,
which you can make 5 to 20 feet in diameter. Voucan
orient the portal in any direction you choose. The portal
lasts for the duration.
The portal has a front and a back on each plane where
itappears. Travei through the portal is possible only
bymoving through its fronl. Anything that does so is
instantly transported to the other plane, appearing in
the unoccupied space nearest to the portal.
Deities and other planar ruIers can prevent portaIs
created bythis spell from opening in their presence or
anywhere within their domains.
When you cast this spell, you can speak the name
ofa specific creature (apseudonym, title, or nickname
doesn't work). ]fthat creature is on a plane other than
the one youare on, the portal opens in the named
creature's immediate vicinity and draws the creature
through ittothe nearest unoccupied space onyour side
ofthe portal. Vougain nospecial power over the creature,
and itis free to act as the DMdeems appropriate. lt
might leave, attack you, or help you.
GEAS
5th~eveIenchantment
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: 30 days
Vouplace a magical command on a creature that you
can see within range, forcing itto carry out some
service or refrain fram some action or course of activity
as you decide. ]f the creature can understand you, it
must succeed on a Wisdom saving thraw or become
charmed by you for the duration. While the creature
is charmed by you, it takes 5dlO psychic damage
each time it acts in a manner directly counter to your
instructions, but no more than once each day. A creature
that can't understand you is unaffected by the spell.
Vou can issue any command you choose, short of an
activity that would result in certain death. Should you
issue a suicidal command, the spell ends.
Vou can end the spell early by using an action to
dismiss it. A remove curse,greater restoration, orwish
spell also ends it.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 7th or 8th leveI, the duration is 1year.
When you cast this spell using a spell slot of 9th leveI,
the spelllasts until it is ended by one of the spells
mentioned above.
GENTLE REPOSE
2nd-level necromallcy (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a pinch of salt and one copper
piece placed on each of the corpse's eyes, which must
remain there for the duration)
Duration: 10 days
Vou touch a corpse or other remains. For the
duration, the target is protected from decay and can't
become undead.
The spell also effectively extends the time Iimit on
raising the target from the dead, since days spent under
the influence of this spell don't count against the time
limit of spells such as raise dead.
GIANT INSECT
4th-level transmutatioll
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou transform up to ten centipedes, three spiders, tive
wasps, or one scorpion within range into giant versions
of their natural forms for the duration. A centipede
becomes a giant centipede, a spider becomes a giant
spider, a wasp becomes a giant wasp, and a scorpion
becomes a giant scorpion.
Each creature obeys your verbal commands, and
in combat, they act on your tum each raund. The DM
has the statistics for these creatures and resolves their
actions and movement.
A creature remains in its giant size for the duration,
until it draps to Ohit points, or until you use an action to
dismiss the effect on it.
The DM might allow you to choose different targets.
For example, ifyou transform a bee, its giant version
might have the same statistics as a giant wasp.GLIBNESS
8th-level transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: 1 hour
Until the spell ends, when you make a Charisma
check, you can replace the number you rall with aiS.
Additionally, no matter what you say, magic that would
determine ifyou are telling the truth indicates that you
are being truthful.
GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY
6th-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (lO-foot radius)
Components: V,S, M(a glass or crystal bead that
shatters when the spell ends)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
An immobile, faintly shimmering barrier springs into
existence in a lO-foot radius around you and remains for
the duration.
Any spell of 5th leveI or lower cast from outside the
barrier can't affect creatures or objects within it, even
if the spell is cast using a higher leveI spell slot. Such a
spell can target creatures and objects within the barrier,
but the spell has no effect on them. Similarly, the area
within the barrier is excluded fram the areas affected
by such spells.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the barrier blocks spells
of one levei higher for each slot leveI above 6th.
GLYPH OF WARDING
3rd-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (incense and powdered diamond
worth at least 200 gp. which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled or triggered
When you cast this spell, you inscribe a glyph that
harms other creatures, either upon a surface (such as
a table or a section of floor or wall) or within an object
that can be closed (such as a book, a scroll, or a treasure
chest) to conceal the glyph. Ifyou choose a surface, the
glyph can cover an area of the surface no larger than
10 feet in dia meter. lf you choose an object, that object
must remain in its place; if the object is moved more
than lO feet from where you cast this spell, the glyph is
broken, and the spell ends without being triggered.
The glyph is nearly invisible and requires a successful
Intelligence (lnvestigation) check against your spell save
DC to be found.
Vou decide what triggers the glyph when you cast
the spell. For glyphs inscribed on a surface, the most
typical triggers include touching or standing on the
glyph, removing another object covering the glyph,
approaching within a certain distance of the glyph, or
manipulating the object on which the glyph is inscribed.
For glyphs inscribed within an object, the most common
PART 3 ISPELLS245
lriggers include opening lhal objecl, approaching wilhin
a cerlain dislance of lhe objecl, or seeing or reading lhe
glyph. Once a glyph is lriggered, lhis spell ends.
Voucan furlher retine lhe lrigger so lhe spell aclivales
only under cerlain circumslances or according lo
physical characlerislics (such as heighl or weighl),
crealure kind (for example, the ward could be seI lo
affecl aberralions or drow), or alignment. Voucan also
seI condilions for crealures lhal don'l lrigger lhe glyph,
such as lhose who say a cerlain password.
When you inscribe lhe glyph, choose expiosive runes
or aspell glyph.
Explosive Runes. When lriggered, lhe glyph erupls
with magical energy in a 20-fool-radius sphere cenlered
on lhe glyph. The sphere spreads around corners. Each
crealure in lhe area musl make a Dexlerily saving
lhrow. A crealure takes Sd8 acid, cold, tire, lighlning, or
thunder damage on a failed saving lhrow (your choice
when you creale the glyph), or half as much damage on a
successful one.
SpelJ Glyph. Vou can slore a prepared spell of
3rd levei or lower in lhe glyph by casling it as parI
of crealing lhe glyph. The spell musl largel a single
crealure or an area. The spell being slored has no
immediale effecl when casl in lhis way. When lhe glyph
is lriggered, lhe slored spell is cast. If lhe spell has a
largel, il largels lhe crealure lhal lriggered lhe glyph.
If lhe spell affecls an area, lhe area is cenlered on
lhal crealure. Ir lhe spell summons hoslile crealures
or creales harmful objecls or lraps, lhey appear as
close as possible lo lhe inlruder and attack it. Ir lhe
spell requires concenlralion, il !asls unlil lhe end of ils
full duralion.
At Higher Leveis. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell slol of 41h levei or higher, lhe damage of an
expiosive runes glyph increases by Id8 for each si01
levei above 3rd. If you creale a spell glyph, you can slore
any spell of up lo lhe same leve! as lhe si01you use for
lhegiyph ofwarding.
GOODBERRY
1st-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M (a sprig of mistleloe)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Up lo len berries appear in your hand and are infused
wilh magic for lhe duralion. A crealure can use ilS
aclion to eal one berry. Ealing a berry reslores I hil
poinl, and lhe berry provides enough nourishmenl lo
suslain a creature for one day.
The berries lose lheir polency if lhey have nol been
consumed wilhin 24 hours of lhe casling of lhis spell.
GRASPING VINE
4th-ievei conjuration
Casting Time: I bonus aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
PART 3 ISPELLSVou conjure a vine lhal sprouls from lhe ground in an
unoccupied space of your choice lhal you can see wilhin
range. When you casl lhis spell, you can direcl lhe vine
lOlash oul at a crealure wilhin 30 feel of il lhal you can
see. Thal crealure musl succeed on a Dexlerily saving
lhrow or be pulled 20 feel direclly loward lhe vine.
Unlil lhe spell ends, you can direcl lhe vine lo lash oul
aI lhe same crealure or anolher one as a bonus aclion
on each of your lurns.
GREASE
1st-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M (a bil of pork rind or butter)
Duration: I minule
5lick grease covers lhe ground in a lO-fool square
cenlered on a poinl wilhin range and lurns il inlo
difficull lerrain for lhe duralion.
When lhe grease appears, each crealure slanding in
ils area musl succeed on a Dexlerity saving lhrow or fali
prone. A crealure thal enlers lhe area or ends ils lurn
lhere musl also succeed on a Dexlerily saving lhrow
or fali prone.
GREATER INVISIBILITY
4th-levei ilIusion
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V.5
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
Vou or a crealure you louch becomes invisible unlil lhe
spell ends. Anylhing lhe largel is wearing or carrying is
invisible as long as il is on lhe largel's person.
GREATER RESTORATlON
5th-ievei abjuration
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M (diamond dusl worlh aI leasl 100
gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Vou imbue a crealure you louch wilh posilive energy lo
undo a debililating effect. Vou can reduce lhe largel's
exhauslion leveI by one, or end one of lhe following
effecls on lhe largel:
One effecl lhat charmed or pelritied lhe largel
One curse, including lhe larget's attunemenl lo a
cursed magic ilem
Any reduclion lo one of lhe largel's abilily scores
One effecl reducing lhe larget's hil poinl maximum
GUARDIAN OF FAITH
4th-ievei conjuration
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V
Duration: 8 hours
A Large speclral guardian appears and hovers for lhe
duralion in an unoccupied space of your choice lhal you
can see within range. The guardian occupies that space
and is indistinct except for a gleaming sword and shield
emblazoned with the symbol of your deity.
Any creature hostile to you that moves to a space
within lO feet of the guardian for the first time on a
turn must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw. The
creature takes 20 radiant damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one. The guardian
vanishes when it has dealt a total of 60 damage.
GUARDS AND WARDS
6th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (burning incense, a small
measure of brimstone and oil, a knotled string, a
small amount of umber hulk blood, and a small silver
rod worth at least 10 gp)
Duration: 24 hours
Voucreate a ward that protects up to 2,500 square feet
of floor space (an area 50 feet square, or one hundred
5-foot squares or twenty-five lO-foot squares). The
warded area can be up to 20 feet tall, and shaped as you
desire. Voucan ward several stories of a stronghold by
dividing the area among them, as long as you can walk
into each contiguous area while you are casting the spell.
When you cast this spell, you can specify individuais
that are unaffected by any or ali of the effects that
you choose. Voucan also specify a password that,
when spoken aloud, makes the speaker immune to
these effects.
Guards and wards creates the following effects within
the warded area.
Corridors. Fog fills ali the warded corridors, making
them heavily obscured. In addition, at each intersection
or branching passage offering a choice of direction,
there is a 50 percent chance that a creature other than
you will believe it is going in the opposite direction from
the one it chooses.
Doors. Ali doors in the warded area are magically
locked, as ifsealed by an arcane lock spell. In addition,
you can cover up to ten doors with an illusion (equivalent
to the illusory object function of the minor illusion spell)
to make them appear as plain sections of wall.
Stairs. Webs fill ali stairs in the warded area from top
to botlom, as the webspell. These strands regrow in 10
minutes if they are burned or torn away while guards
and wards lasts.
Other SpelJ Effect. Voucan place your choice of one
of the following magical effects within the warded area
of the stronghold.
Placedancing lights in four corridors. Vou can desig-
nate a simple program that the lights repeat as long as
guards and wards lasts.
Placemagic mouth in two locations.
Placestinking cloud in two locations. The vapors
appear in the places you designate; they return within
10 minutes if dispersed by wind while guards and
wardslasts.
Place a constant gust of wind in one corridor or room.
PART 3 ISPELLSPlace asuggestion in one location. Vouselect an area
of up to 5 feet square, and any creature that enters
or passes through the area receives the suggestion
mentally.
The whole warded area radiates magic. A dispel
magiccast on a specific effect, if successful, removes
only that effect.
Vou can create a permanently guarded and warded
structure by casting this spell there every day
for one year.
GUIDANCE
Divination cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Voutouch one willing creature. Once before the spell
ends, the target can roll a d4 and add the number rolled
to one ability check of its choice. lt can roll the die before
or after making the ability check. The spell then ends.
GUIDING BOLT
1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: I rOllnd
A flash of light streaks toward a creature ofyour choice
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the
target. On a hit, the target takes 4d6 radiant damage,
and the next atlack roll made against this target before
the end ofyour next turn has advantage, thanks to the
mystical dim light glittering on the target until then.
At Higher LeveIs. When YOllcast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot levei above 1st.
GUSTOFWIND
2nd-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (60-foot line)
Components: V,S, M (a legume seed)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Aline of strong wind 60 feet long and 10 feet wide
blasts from you in a direction you choose for the spell's
duration. Each creature that starts its turn in the line
must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed
15 feet away from you in a direction following the line.
Any creature in the line must spend 2 feet of
movement for every I foot it moves when moving
doser to YOU.
The gust disperses gas or vapor, and it extinguishes
candles, torches, and similar unprotected flames in
the area. It causes protected fiames, such as those of
lanterns, to dance wildly and has a 50 percent chance to
extingllish them.
As a bonus action on each of your turns before the
spell ends, you can change the direction in which the
line blasts from you.
HAIL OF THORNS
1st-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hitacreature with aranged weapon
atlack before the spell ends, this spell creates arain
ofthorns that sprouts from your ranged weapon or
ammunition. Inaddition tothe normal effect ofthe
attack, the target ofthe atlack and each creature within
5feet ofitmust make aDexterity saving throw. A
creature takes Id10piercing damage on afailed save, ar
half as much damage on asuccessful one.
At Higher LeveIs. Ifyou cast this spell using aspell
slot of2nd leveior higher, the damage increases by IdlO
foreach slot leveIabove Ist (toamaximum of6d10).
HALLOW
5th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 24 hours
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(herbs, oils, and incense worth at
least 1,000 gp,which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
Voutouch apoint and infuse an area around itwith holy
(orunholy) power. The area can have aradius up to60
feet, and the spell fails ifthe radius includes an area
already under the effect a hallowspell. The affected area
issubject tothe following effects.
First, celestiais, elementals, fey,fiends, and undead
can't enter the area, nor can such creatures charm,
frighten, or possess creatures within it.Anycreature
charmed, frightened, or possessed bysuch acreature
isno longer charmed, frightened, or possessed upon
entering the area. Voucan exclude one or more ofthose
types ofcreatures from this effect.
Second, you can bind an extra effect tothe area.
Choose the effect from the following list, orchoose an
effect offered bythe DM.Some ofthese effects apply to
creatures inthe area; you can designate whether the
effect applies toalicreatures, creatures that followa
specific deity or leader, or creatures ofaspecific sort,
such as orcs or trolls. When acreature that would be
affected enters the spell's area forthe first time on a
turn orstarts its turn there, itcan make aCharisma
saving throw. On asuccess, the creature ignores the
extra effect until itleaves the area.
Courage.Affected creatures can't be frightened
while inthe area.
Darkness.Darkness fillsthe area. Normallight,
as well as magicallight created byspells ofalower
leveithan the slot you used tocast this spell, can't
illuminate the area.
DayJight.Bright light fillsthe area. Magical darkness
created byspells ofalower leveithan the slotyou used
tocast this spell can't extinguish the light.
Energy Protection. Affected creatures inthe area
have resistance toone damage type ofyour choice,
except forbludgeoning, piercing, or slashing.Energy VuInerabiJity. Affected creatures inthe area
have vulnerability toone damage type ofyour choice,
except forbludgeoning, piercing, or slashing.
EverIasting Rest. Dead bodies interred inthe area
can't beturned into undead.
Extradimensionallnterference. Affected creatures
can't move or traveI using teleportation orby
extradimensional orinterplanar means.
Fear.Affected creatures are frightened
while inthe area.
SiJence.Nosound can emanate from within the area,
and nosound can reach into it.
Tongues.Affected creatures can communicate with
anyother creature inthe area, even ifthey don't share a
common language.
HALLUCINATORY TERRAIN
4th-levei iIIusion
Casting Time: 10minutes
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,S, M(astone, atwig, and abit
ofgreen plant)
Duration: 24 hours
Voumake natural terrain ina 150-foot cube inrange
look, sound, and smelllike some other sort ofnatural
terrain. Thus, open fields or aroad can be made to
resemble aswamp, hill,crevasse, or some other difficult
or impassable terrain. Apond can be made toseem
like agrassy meadow, aprecipice like agentle slope,
or arock-strewn gully like awide and smooth road.
Manufactured structures, equipment, and creatures
within the area aren't changed inappearance.
The tactile characteristics ofthe terrain are
unchanged, so creatures entering the area are likelyto
see through the illusion. Ifthe difference isn't obvious
bytouch, acreature carefully examining the illusion can
atlempt an Intelligence (lnvestigation) check against
your spell save DCtodisbelieve it.Acreature who
discerns the illusion forwhat itis,sees itas avague
image superimposed on the terrain.
HARM
6th-levei necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouunleash avirulent disease on acreature that
you can see within range. The target must make a
Constitution saving throw. On afailed save, ittakes
14d6 necrotic damage, or half as much damage on a
successful save. The damage can't reduce the target's
hit points below I.]fthe target fails the saving throw,
itshit point maximum isreduced for I hour byan
amount equal tothe necrotic damage ittook. Anyeffect
that removes adisease allows acreature's hit point
maximum toreturn tonormal before that time passes,
PART 3 SPELLS249
HASTE
3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30feet
Components: V,5, M(ashaving oflicorice root)
Duration: Concentration, upto I minute
Choose awilling creature thatyoucan see within range.
Untilthespell ends, thetarget's speed isdoubled, it
gains a+2bonus toAC,ithas advantage onDexterity
saving throws, and itgains anadditional action oneach
ofitsturns. That aclion can beused onlylolake the
Attack(oneweapon attack only),Dash, Disengage, Hide,
orUseanObjectaclion.
When lhespell ends, the target can't moveortake
actions untilafter itsnextturn, asawaveoflelhargy
sweeps overit.
HEAL
6th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Choose acrealure lhatyoucan see within range. A
surge ofposiliveenergywashes through thecreature,
causing ittoregain 70hitpoints. This spell also ends
blindness, deafness, and anydiseases affecting the
larget. This spell has noeffectonconslrucls orundead.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slolof7thleveiorhigher, theamount ofhealing
increases by10foreach slotleveIabove6th.
HEALING WORD
1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: 60feet
Components: V
Duration: Instanlaneous
Acreature ofyourchoicethat youcan see within range
regains hitpoints equal to Id4+yourspellcasting
abilitymodifier.This spell has noeffectonundead
orconstructs.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slotof2nd leveiorhigher, lhe healing increases by
ld4 foreach slolleveIabove 1st.
HEAT METAL
2nd-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60feet
Components: V,5, M(apiece ofironand aflame)
Duration: Concenlration, upto 1minute
Choose amanufactured metal object,such asametal
weapon orasuit ofheavyormedium metal armor, that
youcan see within range. Voucause the objecttoglow
red-hot.Anycreature inphysical contact with the objecl
takes 2d8 firedamage whenyoucast thespell. Untilthe
spell ends, youcan use abonus action oneach ofyour
subsequent turns tocause this damage again.
PART 3 ISPEL[,SIfacreature isholding orwearing theobjectand
takes the damage fromit,the creature must succeed on
aConstitution saving throw ordrop theobject ifitcanolf
itdoesn't drop theobject,ithas disadvantage onattack
rollsand abilitychecks untilthe start ofyournext turno
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slotof3rdleveiorhigher,the damage increases by
ld8 foreach sIotleveIabove2nd.
HELLISH REBUKE
1st-/evel evocation
Casting Time: 1reaction, whichyoutake inresponse
tobeing damaged bya creature within 60 feetofyou
thatyoucansee
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Voupointyourfinger,and the creature that damaged
youismomentarily surrounded byhellish flames.The
creature must make aDexterity saving throw. Ittakes
2dlOfiredamage onafailedsave,orhalfas much
damage onasuccessful one.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slotof2ndleveiorhigher, the damage increases by
ldl0 foreachslot leveiabove 1st.
HEROES' FEAST
6th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 10minutes
Range: 30feet
Components: V,5 ,M(agem-encrusted bowlworth at
least 1,000gp,which thespell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voubring forth agreat feast, including magnificent
foodand drink. The feast takes I hour toconsume and
disappears attheend ofthat time,and the beneficiai
effectsdon'tset inuntilthis hour isover.Uptotwelve
other creatures can partake ofthe feast.
Acreature that partakes ofthe feast gains several
benefits. Thecreature iscured ofalidiseases and
poison, becomes immune topoison and being
frightened, and makes aliWisdom saving throws with
advantage. Itshitpoint maximum also increases by
2dl0, and itgains the same number ofhitpoints. These
benefits last for24hours.
HEROISM
1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: Touch
Components: V,5
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Awilling creature youtouchisimbued withbravery.
Untilthespell ends, the creature isimmune tobeing
frightened and gains temporary hitpoints equal to
yourspellcasting abilitymodifier atthestart ofeach
ofitsturns. When the spell ends, the target loses any
remaining temporary hitpoints fromthis spell.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucastthisspellusing
aspellslotof2ndleveIorhigher.youcantargetone
additional creature foreachsIotleveiabove1st.
HEX
1st-leveIenchantment
Casting Time: 1bonusaction
Range: 90feet
Components: V.S.M(thepetrifiedeyeofanewt)
Duration: Concentration. upto1hour
Vouplaceacurse onacreature thatyoucanseewithin
range.Untilthespellends.youdealanextra Id6
necroticdamage tothetargetwheneveryouhititwith
anattack.AIso.chooseoneabilitywhenyoucastthe
spell.Thetarget hasdisadvantage onabilitychecks
madewiththechosenability.
Ifthetargetdropsto Ohitpointsbeforethisspell
ends.youcanuseabonusactiononasubsequent turn
ofyourstocurse anewcreature.
Aremove cursecastonthetargetendsthisspellearly.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucastthisspellusing
aspellslotof3rdor4thleveI.youcanmaintain your
concentration onthespellforupto8hours.Whenyou
useaspellslotof5thleveiorhigher.youcanmaintain
yourconcentration onthespellforupto24hours.
HOLD MONSTER
5th-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90feet
Components: V.S.M(asmall.straight pieceofiron)
Duration: Concentration. upto1minute
Chooseacreature thatyoucanseewithinrange.The
targetmustsucceed onaWisdomsavingthroworbe
paralyzed fortheduration. Thisspellhasnoeffecton
undead.Attheendofeachofitsturns, thetargetcan
makeanother Wisdomsavingthrow.Onasuccess. the
spellendsonthetarget.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucastthisspellusing
aspellslotof6thleveiorhigher.youcantargetone
additional creature foreachslotleveIabove5th.The
creatures mustbewithin30feetofeachotherwhen
youtargetthem.
HOLD PERSON
2nd-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60feet
Components: V,S.M(asmall,straight pieceofiron)
Duration: Concentration. upto1minute
Chooseahumanoid thatyoucanseewithinrange.
Thetargetmustsucceed onaWisdomsavingthrow
orbeparalyzed fortheduration.Attheendofeachof
itsturns. thetargetcanmakeanother Wisdomsaving
throw.Onasuccess. thespellendsonthetarget.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucastthisspellusing
aspellslotof3rdleveiorhigher,youcantargetone
additional humanoid foreachslotleveIabove2nd.The
humanoids mustbewithin30feetofeachotherwhen
youtargetthem.HOLY AURA
8th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V.S.M(atinyreliquaryworthatleast
1,000gpcontaining asacred relic,suchasascrap of
clothfromasaint's robeorapieceofparchment from
areligioustext)
Duration: Concentration. upto1minute
Divinelightwashes outfromyouandcoalesces
inasoftradiance ina30-footradiusaroundyou.
Creatures ofyourchoiceinthatradiuswhenyoucast
thisspellsheddimlightina5-footradius andhave
advantage onalisavingthrows. andothercreatures
havedisadvantage onattackrollsagainst themuntil
thespellends.Inaddition,whenafiendoranundead
hitsanaffectedcreature withameleeattack. theaura
flasheswithbrilliant light.Theattacker mustsucceed
onaConstitution savingthroworbeblindeduntil
thespellends.
HUNGER OFHADAR
3rd-level conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 150feet
Components: V,S.M(apickledoctopustentacle)
Duration: Concentration, upto1minute
Vouopenagatewaytothedarkbetween thestars, a
regioninfestedwithunknown horrors. A20-foot-radius
sphere ofblackness andbittercoldappears. centered
onapointwithrangeandlasting fortheduration. This
voidisfilledwithacacophonyofsoftwhispers and
slurping noisesthatcanbeheard upto30feetaway.No
light,magicalorotherwise, canilluminate thearea,and
creatures fullywithinthearea areblinded.
Thevoidcreates awarp inthefabricofspace.andthe
area isdifficultterrain. Anycreature thatstarts itsturn
intheareatakes 2d6colddamage.Anycreature that
endsitsturninthearea mustsucceed onaDexterity
savingthrowortake2d6aciddamage asmilky.
otherworldly tentacles rubagainst it.
HUNTER'S MARK
1st-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1bonusaction
Range: 90feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, upto1hour
Vouchooseacreature youcanseewithinrangeand
mysticallymarkitasyourquarry.Untilthespellends,
youdealanextra 1d6damage tothetargetwhenever
youhititwithaweapon attack.andyouhaveadvantage
onanyWisdom(Perception) orWisdom(Survival)
checkyoumaketofindit.lfthetargetdrops to Ohit
pointsbeforethisspellends.youcanuseabonusaction
onasubsequent turnofyourstomarkanewcreature.
At Higher Leveis. Whenyoucastthisspellusing
aspellslotof3rdor4thleveI,youcanmaintain your
concentration onthespellforupto8hours.Whenyou
useaspellslotof5thleveiorhigher,youcanmaintain
yourconcentration onthespellforupto24hours.
PART 3 ISHLLS
252HYPNOTIC PATTERN
3rd-level iIIusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feet
Components: 5, M(aglowingstickofincense ora
crystal viaIfilledwithphosphorescent material)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1minute
Voucreate atwisting pattern ofcolors that weaves
through the air inside a30-footcubewithin range.
The pattern appears foramoment andvanishes. Each
creature inthe area whosees the pattern must make
aWisdom saving throw.Onafailedsave,the creature
becomes charmed fortheduration. While charmed
bythisspell,thecreature isincapacitated andhas
aspeed ofO.
The spell ends foranaffected creature ifittakes any
damage orifsomeone e1seuses anaction toshake the
creature outofitsstupor.
ICE STORM
4th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,5, M(apinchofdust and afew
drops ofwater)
Duration: Instantaneous
Ahailofrock-hard icepounds totheground ina
20-foot-radius, 40-foot-highcylinder centered ona
pointwithin range. Each creature inthecylinder must
make aDexterity saving throw.Acreature takes 2d8
bludgeoning damage and 4d6 colddamage onafailed
save,orhalfasmuch damage onasuccessful one.
Hailstones turn the storm's area ofeffectintodifficult
terrain untilthe end ofyournext turno
At Higher Leve/s. Whenyoucast this spell using a
spell slotof5th leveIorhigher, the bludgeoning damage
increases byld8 foreachslot leveiabove4th.
IDENTIFY
1st-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M(apearl worth atleast 100gpand
anowlfeather)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouchoose oneobjectthat youmust touchthroughout
thecasting ofthespe11.Ifitisamagic itemorsome
other magic-imbued object,youlearn itsproperties
and howtouse them, whether itrequires attunement
touse, and howmanycharges ithas, ifany.Voulearn
whether anyspells are affecting theitemand what they
are. lfthe itemwas crealed byaspell,youlearn which
spell created it.
lfyouinstead louch acrealure lhroughoullhe casling,
youlearn whal spells, ifany,are currenlly affectingi!.
ILLUSORY SCRIPT
1st-levei iIIusion (ritual)
Casting Time: 1minule
Range: Touch
PART 3 ISPELLSComponents: 5, M(alead-based inkworlh alleast 10
gp,which the spellconsumes)
Duration: 10days
Vouwrite onparchmenl, paper, orsome olher suilable
writing malerial and imbue ilwilhapolent illusion lhal
lasls fortheduralion.
Toyouand anycrealures youdesignate when you
casllhe spell,the writing appears normal, written in
your hand, and conveyswhalever meaning youintended
when youwrole lhe lex!.Toaliolhers, lhewriting
appears as ifilwere written inanunknown ar magical
scripllhal isuninlelligible. Alternalively,youcan cause
lhewriling loappear tobeanentire1ydifferenl message,
written inadifferenl hand and language, lhough lhe
language must beoneyouknow.
5hould thespell bedispelled, the original scripl and
the illusion bolh disappear.
Acrealure wilhlruesighl can read the
hidden message.
IMPRISONMENT
9th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1minule
Range: 30feel
Components: V,5, M(avellumdepiclion oracarved
staluette inlhe likeness ofthe larget, and aspecial
componenllhal varies according lolheversion oflhe
spellyouchoose, worth atleast 500 gpper HitDie
oflhetarget)
Duration: Untildispelled
Voucreate amagical restraint toholdacreature that
youcan seewithin range. The target must succeed on
aWisdom saving throw orbebound bythe spell;ifit
succeeds, itisimmune lothis spell ifyoucast itagain.
While affectedbythis spell, the creature doesn't need
tobreathe, eat,ordrink, and itdoesn't age. Divination
spells can't locate orperceive the targe!.
When youcast the spell,youchoose one ofthe
followingforms ofimprisonment.
Buria/.The target isentombed farbeneath the earth
inasphere ofmagical forcethat isjust large enough to
contain the targe!. Nothing can pass through the sphere,
norcan anycreature teleport oruse planar traveItoget
intooroutofi!.
The special component forthis version ofthe spell isa
small mithral orb.
Chaining.Heavychains, firmlyrooted inthe ground,
holdthe target inplace.The target isrestrained until
thespell ends, and itcan't moveorbemovedbyany
means untilthen.
The special component forthis version ofthe spell isa
finechain ofprecious metal.
Hedged Prison. The spell transports the target into
atinydemiplane that iswarded against teleportation
and planar traveI.The demiplane can bealabyrinth, a
cage, atower,oranysimilar confined structure orarea
ofyourchoice.
The special component forthis version ofthe spell isa
miniature representation ofthe prison made fromjade.
Minimus Containment. The target shrinks toaheight
of1inchand isimprisoned inside agemstone arsimilar
object. Light can pass through the gemstone normally
(allowing the target to see out and other creatures to see
in), but nothing else can pass through, even by means of
teleportation or planar traveI. The gemstone can't be cut
or braken while the spell remains in effcct.
The special component for this version of the spell
is a large, transparent gemstone, such as a corundum,
diamond, or ruby.
Slumber. The target falls asleep and can't be awoken.
The speciai component for this version of the spell
consists of rare soporific herbs.
Ending the Spe/l. During the casting of the spell,
in any of its versions, you can specify a condition that
will cause the spell to end and release the target. The
condition can be as specific or as elaborate as you
choose, but the DM must agree that the condition is
reasonable and has a likelihood of coming to passo The
conditions can be based on a creature's name, identity,
or deity but otherwise must be based on observable
actions or qualities and not based on intangibles such as
levei, class, or hit points.
Adispel magic spell can end the spell only ifit is cast
as a 9th.level spell, targeting either the prison or the
special component used to create it.
Voucan use a particular special component to create
only one prison at a time. Ifyou cast the spell again
using the same component, the target of the first casting
is immediately freed fram its binding.
INCENDIARY CLOUD
8th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range:150 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Aswirling cloud ofsmoke shot through with white-hot
embers appears in a 20.foot-radius sphere centered on
a point within range. The cloud spreads around corners
and is heavily obscured. It lasts for the duration or until
a wind of moderate or greater speed (at least 10miles
per hour) disperses it.
When the cloud appears, each creature in it must
make a Dexterity saving throw. Acreature takes IOd8
/ire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one. Acreature must also make this saving
throw when it enters the spell's area for the /irst time on
a turn or ends its turn there.
The cloud moves 10 feet directly away from you
in a direction that you choose at the start ofeach
ofyour turns.
INFLICT WOUNDS
Ist-level necromancy
Casting Time: 1action
Range:Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Make a melee spell attack against a creature you can
reach. On a hit, the target takes 3d1Onecrotic damage.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
1d10for each slot levei above 1sI.
251INSECT PLAGUE
5th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,S, M(a few grains of sugar, some
kernels of grain, and a smear of fat)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Swarming, biting locusts filla 20-foot-radius sphere
centered on a point you choose within range, The sphere
spreads around corners. The sphere remains for the
duration, and its area is lightly obscured. The sphere's
area is difficult terrain.
When the area appears, each creature in it must
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes
4d 10 piercing damage on a failed save, ar half as much
damage on a successful one. A creature must also make
this saving throw when it enters the spell's area for the
first time on a turn ar ends its turn there.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th levei ar higher, the damage increases by
Id 10 for each slot levei above 5th.
INVISIBILITY
2nd-leveI ilIusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(an eyelash encased
in gum arabic)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
A creature you touch becomes invisible until the spell
ends. Anything the target is wearing or carrying is
invisible as long as it is on the target's person. The spell
ends for a target that attacks ar casts a spell.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei ar higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 2nd.
jUMP
1st-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(a grasshopper's hind leg)
Duration: 1 minute
Voutouch a creature. The creature's jump distance is
tripled until the spell ends.
KNOCK
2nd-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Choose an object that you can see within range. The
object can be a door, a box, a chest, a set of manacles, a
padlock, ar another object that contains a mundane or
magical means that prevents access.
A target that is held shut bya mundane lock ar that
is stuck or barred becomes unlocked, unstuck, or
PART 3 ISPELLSunbarred. lf the object has multiple locks, only one of
them is unlocked.
lf you choose a target that is held shut with arcane
lock,that spell is suppressed for 10 minutes, during
which time the target can be opened and shut normally.
When you cast the spell, a loud knock, audible from as
far away as 300 feet, emanates from the target objecl.
LEGEND LORE
5th-levei divination
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M (incense worth at least 250 gp,
which the spell consumes, and four ivory strips worth
at least 50 gp each)
Duration: Instantaneous
Name or describe a person, place, or object. The spell
brings to your mind a brief summary of the significant
lore about the thing you named. The lore might consist
of current tales, forgotten stories, or even secret lore
that has never been widely known. lf the thing you
named isn't of legendary importance, you gain no
information. The more information you already have
about the thing, the more precise and detailed the
information you receive is.
The information you learn is accurate but might be
couched in figurative language. For example, ifyou
have a mysterious magic axe on hand, the spell might
yield this information: "Woe to the evildoer whose hand
touches the axe, for even the haft slices the hand of the
evil ones. Only a true Child of Stone, lover and beloved
of Moradin, may awaken the true powers of the axe, and
only with the sacred word Rudnogg on the lips."
LEOMUND'S SECRET CHEST
4th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (an exquisite chest, 3 feet by 2 feet
by 2 feet, constructed from rare materiaIs worth at
least 5,000 gp, and a Tiny replica made from the same
materiais worth at least 50 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouhide a chest, and ali its contents, on the Ethereal
Plane. Voumust touch the chest and the miniature
replica that serves as a material component for the spell.
The chest can contain up to 12 cubic feet of nonliving
material (3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet).
While the chest remains on the Ethereal Plane, you
can use an action and touch the replica to recall the
chesl. lt appears in an unoccupied space on the ground
within 5 feet of you. Voucan send the chest back to the
Ethereal Plane by using an action and touching both the
chest and the replica.
After 60 days, there is a cumulative 5 percent chance
per day that the spell's effect ends. This effect ends if
you cast this spell again, if the smaller replica chest is
destroyed, ar ifyou choose to end the spell as an action.
If the spell ends and the larger chest is on the Ethereal
Plane, it is irretrievably losl.
LEOMUNO'S TINY HUT
3rd-/evel evocation (ritual)
Casting Time: I minute
Range: Self (IO-foot-radius hemisphere)
Components: V,S, M(asmall crystal bead)
Duration: 8 hours
A IO-foot-radius immobile dome offorce springs into
existenee around and above you and remains stationary
forthe duration. The spell ends ifyou leave its area.
Nine creatures ofMedium size or smaller ean fitinside
the dome with you. The spell fails ifits area includes a
larger ereature or more than nine ereatures. Creatures
and objeets within the dome when you east this spell
ean move through itfreely.Aliother ereatures and
objeets are barred from passing through it.Spells and
other magical effeets ean't extend through the dome or
be east through it.The atmosphere inside the spaee is
eomfortable and dry, regardless ofthe weather outside.
Until the spell ends, you ean eommand the interior to
beeome dimly litor dark. The dome is opaque from the
outside, ofany eolor you ehoose, but itis transparent
from the inside.
LESSER RESTORATION
2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Toueh
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Voutoueh a ereature and ean end either one disease or
one eondition afflieting it.The eondition ean be blinded,
deafened, paralyzed, or poisoned.
LEVITATE
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(either a small leather loop or a
pieee ofgolden wire bent into a eup shape with a long
shank on one end)
Duration: Coneentration, up to 10minutes
One ereature or object ofyour ehoice that you ean see
within range rises vertieally, up to 20 feet, and remains
suspended there forthe duration. The spell ean levitate
a target that weighs up to 500 pounds. An unwilling
ereature that sueeeeds on a Constitution saving throw
is unaffected.
The target ean move only bypushing or pulling
against a fixed objeet or surfaee within reaeh (sueh as
a wall or a eeiling), whieh allows it to move as ifitwere
climbing. Vouean ehange the target's altitude byup to
20 feet in either direetion on your turno lfyou are the
target, you ean move up or down as part ofyour move.
Otherwise, you can use your aetion to move the target,
whieh must remain within the spelI's range.
When the spell ends, the target lIoats gently to the
ground ifitisstill aloft.LIGHT
Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Toueh
Components: V,M(afirelly or phosphorescent moss)
Duration: I hour
Voutouch one objeet that is no larger than lOfeet in any
dimensiono Until the spell ends, the objeet sheds bright
light in a 20-foot radius and dim light foran additional
20 feet. The light ean be eolored as you like. Completely
eovering the objeet with something opaque bloeks the
light. The spell ends ifyou east itagain or dismiss it
as an aetion.
lfyou target an objeet held or worn bya hostile
creature, that ereature must sueeeed on a Dexterity
saving throw to avoid the spell.
LIGHTNING ARROW
3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: I bonus aetion
Range: Seif
Components: V,S
Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
The next time you make a ranged weapon attaek during
the spell's duration, the weapon's ammunition, or the
weapon itself ifit's a thrown weapon, transforms into
a bolt oflightning. Make the attaek roll as normal. The
target takes 4d8 Iightning damage on a hit, or half
as mueh damage on a miss, instead ofthe weapon's
normal damage.
Whether you hit or miss, eaeh ereature within 10feet
ofthe target must make a Dexterity saving throw. Eaeh
ofthese ereatures takes 2d8 lightning damage on a
failed save, or half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
The pieee ofammunition or weapon then returns to
its normal form.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of4th levei or higher, the damage for both
effeets ofthe spell inereases by Id8 foreaeh slot
leveIabove 3rd.
LIGHTNING BOLT
3rd-/evel evoeation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Self (lOO-footline)
Components: V,S, M(abit offur and a rod ofamber,
erystal, or glass)
Duration: [nstantaneous
Astroke ofIightning forming a line 100 feet long and 5
feet wide blasts out from you in a direetion you ehoose.
Eaeh ereature in the line must make a Dexterity saving
throw. Aereature takes 8d6 lightning damage on a
failed save, or half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
The lightning ignites lIammable objeets in the area
that aren't being worn or earried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of4th leveIor higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for eaeh slot leveiabove 3rd.
PART 3 SPELLS255
LOCATE ANIMALS OR PLANTS
2nd-leveI divinatian (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(abit affur from abloodhound)
Duration: Instantaneous
Describe ar name aspecific kind ofbeast ar plant.
Concentrating onthe voiceofnature inyour
surroundings, you learn the direction and distance to
the closest creature or plant ofthat kind within 5miles,
ifanyare present.
LOCATE CREATURE
4th-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(abitoffur frama bloodhound)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1hour
Describe ar name acreature that isfamiliar toyou.Vou
sense the direction tothe creature's lacation, as longas
that creature iswithin 1,000 feet ofyou.lfthe creature
ismoving,you know the direction ofits mavement.
The spell can locate aspecific creature known to
you,ar the nearest creature ofaspecific kind (such as
a human ar aunicorn), 50long asyou haveseen such a
creature upclose-within 30 feet-at least once. Ifthe
creature youdescribed ar named isinadifferent form,
such as being under the effects ofa palymarph spell,
this spell doesn't locate the creature.
This spel1can't locate acreature ifrunning water at
least 10feetwide blocks adirect path between youand
the creature.
LOCATE OBJECT
2nd-leveI divinatian
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(afarked twig)
Duration: Cancentration, up to10minutes
Describe arname an object that isfamiliar toyou.Vou
sense the direction tothe object's location, as lang as
that object iswithin 1,000 feetafyou.Ifthe object isin
motion, yauknow the direction ofitsmovement.
The spell can locate aspecific object known toyou,
as longasyou haveseen itupclose-within 30 feet-at
least once, Alternatively, the spel1can locate the nearest
abjectofaparticular kind, such as a certain kind of
apparel, jewelry, furniture, tool,ar weapon.
This spel1can't locate an object ifanythickness of
lead, evenathin sheet, blocks adirect path between you
and the object.
LONGSTRIDER
1st-leveI transmutatian
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(apinch ofdirt)
Duration: 1hour
Voutouch a creature. The target's speed increases by10
feet until the spel1ends.
PART 3 ISPELLSAt Higher LeveIs. When youcast this spel1using
aspell slot of2nd leveiar higher, youcan target one
additional creature foreach slot leveIabove 1st.
MAGEARMOR
1st-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(apiece ofcured leather)
Duration: 8hours
Voutouch awilling creature who isn't wearing armor,
and apratective magical forcesurrounds ituntil the
spel1ends. The target's base ACbecomes 13 +its
Dexterity modifier. The spel1ends ifthe target dons
armar ar ifyoudismiss the spell as an action.
MAGE HAND
Conjuration cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1minute
Aspectral, floating hand appears atapointyou choose
within range. The hand lasts forthe duration ar until
youdismiss itas an action. The hand vanishes ifitis
ever more than 30 feetawayfromyou arifyoucast
this spel1again.
Voucan use your action tocontraI the hand. Voucan
use the hand tomanipulate an object, open an unlocked
doar ar container, stow or retrieve an item from an open
container, ar paurthe contents out ofavia!'Voucan
movethe hand upto30 feeteach time youuse it.
The hand can't atlack, activate magic items, arcarry
more than 10pounds.
MAGIC CIRCLE
3rd-Ievel abjuratian
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 10feet
Components: V,S, M(holywater ar powdered
silver and iron worth atleast 100gp,which the
spel1consumes)
Duration: 1hour
Voucreate a 10-foot-radius, 20-foot-tal1cylinder of
magical energy centered onapoint onthe ground
that youcan see within range. Glowing runes appear
wherever the cylinder intersects with the lIoorar
other surface.
Choose one armore ofthe followingtypes of
creatures: celestiaIs, elementals, fey,fiends, ar undead.
The circle affects acreature ofthe chosen type inthe
fol1owingways:
The creature can't willingly enter the cylinder by
nonmagical means. Ifthe creature tries touse tele-
portation ar interplanar traveItodoso, itmust first
succeed onaCharisma saving throw.
The creature has disadvantage onattack ral1sagainst
targets within the cylinder.
Targets within the cylinder can't becharmed, fright-
ened,arpossessed bythe creature.
Whenyoucastthisspell,youcanelecttocause its
magictooperateinthereversedirection, preventing a
creature ofthespecifiedtypefromleavingthecylinder
andprotecting targets outsideit.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof4thleveIorhigher,theduration increases by
1hourforeachslotleveiabove3rd.
MAGICJAR
6th./evel necromancy
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: Self
Components: V,S,M(agem,crystal,reliquary,orsome
otherornamental container worthatleast500gp)
Duration: Untildispelled
Yourbodyfallsintoacatatonic stateasyoursoulleaves
itandenters thecontainer youusedforthespell's
material component. Whileyoursoulinhabits the
container,youareawareofyoursurroundings asifyou
wereinthecontainer's space.Voucan'tmoveoruse
reactions. Theonlyactionyoucantakeistoprojectyour
soulupto100feetoutofthecontainer, eitherreturning
toyourlivingbody(andendingthespell)orattempting
topossess ahumanoids body.
Voucanattempt topossess anyhumanoid within
100feetofyouthatyoucansee(creatures warded bya
protection[romevil and goodormagic circIespellcan't
bepossessed). Thetarget mustmakeaCharisma saving
throw.Onafailure,yoursoulmovesintothetarget's
body,andthetarget's soulbecomes trapped inthe
container. Onasuccess, thetargetresists yourefforts
topossess it,andyoucan'tattempt topossess itagain
for24hours.
Onceyoupossess acreature's body,youcontrolit.
Yourgamestatistics arereplaced bythestatistics ofthe
creature, thoughyouretainyouralignment andyour
Intelligence,Wisdom,andCharisma scores. Vouretain
thebenefitofyourownclassfeatures. Irthetargethas
anyclassleveis,youcan'tuseanyofitsclassfeatures.
Meanwhile,thepossessed creature's soulcan
perceivefromthecontainer usingitsownsenses, butit
can'tmoveortakeactionsatali.
Whilepossessing abody,youcanuseyouractionto
return fromthehostbodytothecontainer ifitiswithin
100feetofyou,returning thehostcreature's soulto
itsbody.Ifthehostbodydieswhileyou'reinit,the
creature dies,andyoumustmakeaCharisma saving
throwagainstyourownspellcasting DC.Onasuccess,
youreturn tothecontainer ifitiswithin 100feetofyou.
Otherwise, youdie.
Ifthecontainer isdestroyed orthespellends,your
soulimmediatelyreturns toyourbody.Ifyourbodyis
morethan 100feetawayfromyouorifyour bodyis
deadwhenyouattempttoreturn toit,youdie. Iranother
creature's soulisinthecontainer whenitisdestroyed,
thecreature's soulreturns toitsbodyifthebodyisalive
andwithin 100feet.Otherwise, thatcreature dies.
Whenthespellends,thecontainer isdestroyed.MAGIC MISSILE
Ist./evel evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Voucreatethree glowingdarts ofmagicalforce.Each
dart hitsacreature ofyourchoicethatyoucansee
withinrange.Adartdeals Id4+Iforcedamage toits
target.Thedarts alistrikesimultaneously, andyoucan
directthemtohitonecreature orsevera!.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof2ndleveiorhigher,thespellcreates one
moredart foreachslotleveIabove1st.
MAGIC MOUTH
2nd./evel iI1usion(ritual)
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 30feet
Components: V,S,M(asmallbitofhoneycomb
andjadedustworthatleast 10gp,whichthe
spellconsumes)
Duration: Untildispelled
Vouimplantamessage withinanobjectinrange,a
message thatisuttered whenatriggerconditionismet.
Chooseanobjectthatyoucanseeandthatisn'tbeing
wornorcarried byanother creature. Thenspeak the
message, whichmustbe25wordsorless,thoughit
canbedeliveredoveraslongas10minutes. Finally,
determine thecircumstance thatwilltrigger thespellto
deliveryourmessage.
Whenthatcircumstance occurs, amagicalmouth
appears ontheobjectandrecitesthemessage inyour
voiceandatthesamevolumeyouspoke. Irtheobject
youchosehasamouthorsomething thatlookslikea
mouth(forexample,themouthofastatue),themagical
mouthappears theresothatthewordsappear tocome
fromtheobject'smouth.Whenyoucastthisspell,you
canhavethespellendafteritdeliversitsmessage, or
itcanremain andrepeat itsmessage wheneverthe
triggeroccurs.
Thetriggering circumstance canbeasgeneral oras
detailedasyoulike,thoughitmustbebasedonvisual
oraudibleconditions thatoccurwithin30feetofthe
object.Forexample,youcouldinstruct themouthto
speak whenanycreature moveswithin30feetofthe
objectorwhenasilverbellringswithin30feetofit.
MAGIC WEAPON
2nd./evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1bonusaction
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, upto1hour
Voutouchanonmagical weapon. Untilthespellends,
thatweaponbecomes amagicweaponwitha+1bonus
toattackrollsanddamage rolls.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof4thleveiorhigher,thebonusincreases to
+2.Whenyouuseaspellslotof6thleveIorhigher,the
bonusincreases to+3.
PART 3 ISPELLS257
-MAJOR IMAGE
3rd-Ievel illusion
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S,M(abitoff1eece)
Duration: Concentration, upto10minutes
Voucreate theimageofanobject,acreature, arsome
othervisiblephenomenon thatisnolarger thana
20.footcube.Theimageappears ataspotthatyou
canseewithinrange andlastsfortheduration. lt
seems completelyreal,includingsounds, smells,and
temperature appropriate tothethingdepicted.Vou
can'tcreate sufficientheatorcoldtocause damage, a
sound loudenough todealthunder damage ordeafena
creature, orasmellthatmightsickenacreature (likea
troglodyte's stench).
Aslongasyouarewithinrange oftheillusion,you
canuseyouractiontocause theimagetomoveto
anyother spotwithin range.Astheimagechanges
location,youcanalteritsappearance sothatits
movements appear natural fortheimage.Forexample,
ifyoucreate animageofacreature andmoveit,you
canaltertheimagesothatitappears tobewalking.
Similarly,youcancause theillusiontomakedifferent
sounds atdifferenttimes,evenmaking itcarry ona
conversation, forexample.
Physical interaction withtheimagereveals ittobean
iIlusion,because thingscanpassthrough it.Acreature
thatuses itsactiontoexamine theimagecandetermine
thatitisaniIlusionwithasuccessfullntelligence
(Investigation) checkagainstyourspellsave De.lfa
creature discerns theillusionforwhatitis,thecreature
canseethrough theimage,anditsothersensory
qualities become fainttothecreature.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucast thisspellusing
aspellslotof6thleveIorhigher,thespelllasts until
dispelled, withoutrequiring yourconcentration.
MASS CURE WOUNDS
5th.level conjuration
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 60feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Awaveofhealing energywashes outfromapointof
yourchoicewithin range.Choose uptosixcreatures
ina30.foot.radius sphere centered onthatpoint.Each
target regains hitpointsequalto3d8 +yourspellcasting
abilitymodifier.Thisspellhasnoeffectonundead
orconstructs.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof6thleveiorhigher,thehealing increases by
Id8 foreachslotleveiabove5th.
MASS HEAL
9th./evel conjuration
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 60feet
Components: V,S
Duration: lnstantaneous
PART 3ISPELLSAf100dofhealing energyf10wsfromyouintoinjured
creatures around you.Vourestore upto700hitpoints,
dividedasyouchoose amonganynumber ofcreatures
thatyoucanseewithinrange. Creatures healed by
thisspellarealsocured ofalidiseases andanyeffect
making themblindedordeafened. Thisspellhasno
effectonundead orconstructs.
MASS HEALING WORD
3rd.level evocation
Casting Time: Ibonusaction
Range: 60feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Asyoucalloutwordsofrestoration, uptosixcreatures
ofyour choicethatyoucanseewithinrange regain hit
pointsequaltoId4 +yourspellcasting abilitymodifier.
Thisspellhasnoeffectonundeadorconstructs.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucastthisspellusinga
spellslotof4thleveIorhigher,thehealing increases by
Id4foreachslotleveiabove3rd.
MASS SUGGESTION
6th./evel enchantment
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 60feet
Components: V,M(asnake's tongueandeitherabitof
honeycomb oradropofsweet oil)
Duration: 24hours
Vousuggest acourse ofactivity(limitedtoasentence
ortwo)andmagicallyinfluenceuptotwelvecreatures
ofyourchoicethatyoucanseewithinrange andthat
canhearandunderstand you.Creatures thatcan'tbe
charmed areimmune tothiseffect.Thesuggestion must
beworded insuch amanner astomakethecourse of
actionsound reasonable. Askingthecreature tostab
itself,throwitselfontoaspear, immolateitself,ordo
someotherobviouslyharmful actautomatically negates
theeffectofthespell.
Eachtarget mustmakeaWisdomsavingthrow.Ona
failedsave,itpursues thecourse ofactionyoudescribed
tothebestofitsability.Thesuggested course ofaction
cancontinue fortheentire duration. Ifthesuggested
activitycanbecompleted inashorter time,thespell
endswhenthesubject finisheswhatitwasasked todo.
Voucanalsospecifyconditions thatwilltrigger a
special activityduring theduration. Forexample,you
mightsuggest thatagroupofsoldiers givealitheir
moneytothefirstbeggar theymeet.Ifthecondition isn't
metbeforethespellends,theactivityisn'tperformed.
lfyouoranyofyourcompanions damage acreature
affectedbythisspell,thespellends forthatcreature.
At Higher LeveIs. Whenyoucast thisspellusing
a7th.leveIspellslot,theduration is10days.When
youusean8th.levelspellslot,theduration is30days.
Whenyouusea9th.levelspellslot,theduration isa
yearandaday.
MAZE
8th./eveI conjuration
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 60feet
Components: V,S
Duration:Concentration, up to \Ominutes
Voubanish acreature that you can see within range into
alabyrinthine demiplane. The target remains there for
the duration or until itescapes the maze.
The target can use its action toaltempt toescape.
When itdoes so, itmakes a DC20 Intelligence check. If
itsucceeds, itescapes, and lhe spell ends (aminotallr or
goristro demon automatically succeeds).
When the spell ends, the target reappears in the
space itleft or,ifthat space isoccupied, inthe nearest
unoccupied space.
MELD INTO STONE
3rd-/evel transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range:Touch
Components: V,S
Duration:8hours
Voustep into astone object or surface large enough to
fullycontain yourbody,melding yourself and ali the
equipment you carry with the stone for the dllration.
Using your movement, you step into the stone at a point
you can touch. Nothing ofyour presence remains visible
or otherwise detectable bynonmagical senses.
While merged with the stone, you can't see what
occurs outside it,and any Wisdom (Perception) checks
you make tohear sounds outside itare made with
disadvantage. Vouremain aware ofthe passage of
time and can cast spells onyourself while merged in
the stone. Voucan use your movement to leave the
stone where you entered it,which ends the spell. Vou
otherwise can't move.
Minor physical damage tothe stone doesn't harm
you, but its partial destruction or achange inits shape
(tothe extent that YOllno longer fitwithin it)expels YOll
and deals 6d6 bludgeoning damage toYOll.The stone's
complete destruction (ortransmutation into adifferent
sllbstance) expels YOlland deals 50 bludgeoning damage
toyou. Ifexpelled, you fali prone inan lInoccupied space
cIosest towhere you first entered.
MELF'S ACID ARROW
2nd-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range:90 feet
Components: V,S, M(powdered rhubarb leaf and an
adder's stomach)
Duration:1nstantaneous
Ashimmering green arrow streaks toward atargel
within range and bllrsts inaspray ofacid. Make a
ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, the
target takes 4d4 acid damage immediately and 2d4 acid
damage aIthe end ofits next turnoOn amiss, the arrow
splashes the target with acid forhalf as much ofthe
initial damage and no damage atthe end ofits next turno
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spellllsing a
spell slot of3rd leveior higher, lhe damage (both initial
and later) increases by1d4 foreach slot leveiabove 2nd.MENDING
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1minute
Range:Touch
Components: V.S, M(two lodestones)
Duration:Instantaneous
This spell repairs asingle break or tear inan object
you touch, such as abroken chain link. two halves of
abroken key,atorn c1oak,or aleaking wineskin. As
long as the break or tear is no larger than 1foot in
any dimension, you mend it.leaving no trace ofthe
former damage.
This spell can physically repair amagic item
or construct, but the spell can't restore magic to
such an object.
MESSAGE
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range:120 feet
Components: V,S, M(ashort piece ofcopper wire)
Duration:I round
Voupoint your finger toward acreature within range
and whisper amessage. The target (and only the target)
hears the message and can reply inawhisper that only
you can hear.
Voucan cast this spell through solid objects ifyou
are familiar with the target and know itisbeyond
the barrier. Magical silence, 1footofstone, 1inch of
common metal, a thin sheet oflead, or 3feet ofwood
blocks the spell. The spell doesn't have to followa
straight line and can travei freely around corners or
throllgh openings.
METEOR SWARM
9th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range:1mile
Components: V,S
Duration:Instantaneous
Blazing orbs offire plummet tothe ground at four
different points YOllcan see within range. Each creature
ina40-foot-radius sphere centered on each point you
choose must make a Dexterity saving throw. The sphere
spreads around corners. Acreature takes 20d6 fire
damage and 20d6 bludgeoning damage on afailed
save, or half as much damage on asuccessful one. A
creature in lhe area ofmore than one fieryburst is
affected only once.
The spell damages objects inthe area and ignites
flammable objects that aren't being worn or carried.
MIND BLANK
8th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range:Touch
Components: V,S
Duration:24 hOllrs
Unti! the spell ends, one willing creatllre you tOllchis
immune topsychic damage, any effect lhat would sense
PART 3ISPELLS259
260-its emotions or read its thoughts, divination spells, and
the charmed condition. The spell even foils wish spells
and spells or effects of similar power used to affect the
target's mind or to gain information about the target.
MINOR ILLUSION
lIlusion cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: 5, M (a bit of fleece)
Duration: 1 minute
Voucreate a sound or an image of an object within
range that lasts for the duration. The illusion also ends if
you dismiss it as an action or cast this spell again.
lf you create a sound, its volume can range from a
whisper to a scream. It can be your voice, someone
else's voice, a lion's roar, a beating of drums, or any
other sound you choose. The sound continues unabated
throughout the duration, or you can make discrete
sounds at different times before the spell ends.
lf you create an image of an object-such as a chair,
muddy footprints, or a small chest-it must be no larger
than a 5-foot cube. The image can't create sound, light,
smell, or any other sensory effect. Physical interaction
with the image reveals it to be an illusion, because
things can pass through it.
lf a creature uses its action to examine the sound or
image, the creature can determine that it is an illusion
with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check
against your spell save De. If a creature discerns the
illusion for what it is, the illusion becomes faint to
the creature.
MIRAGE ARCANE
7th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 5ight
Components: V,5
Duration: 10 days
Vou make terrain in an area up to 1 mile square
look, sound, smell, and even feellike some other sort
of terrain. The terrain's general shape remains the
same, however. Open fields or a road could be made to
resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other difficult
or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem like
a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope, or a
rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road.
5imilarly, you can alter the appearance of structures,
or add them where none are present. The spell doesn't
disguise, conceal, or add creatures.
The illusion includes audible, visual, tactile, and
olfactory elements, so it can turn clear ground into
difficult terrain (or vice versa) or otherwise impede
movement through the area. Any piece of the illusory
terrain (such as a rock or stick) that is removed from the
spell's area disappears immediately.
Creatures with truesight can see through the illusion
to the terrain's true form; however, ali other elements
of the illusion remain, so while the creature is aware of
PART 3 ISPELLSthe illusion's presence, the creature can still physically
interact with the illusion.
MIRROR IMAGE
2nd-levei illusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5
Duration: 1 minute
Three illusory duplicates of yourself appear in your
space. Until the spell ends, the duplicates move with
you and mimic your actions, shifting position so it's
impossible to track which image is real. Vou can use
your action to dismiss the illusory duplicates.
Each time a creature targets you with an attack during
the spell's duration, roll a d20 to determine whether the
attack instead targets one of your duplicates.
lf you have three duplicates, you must roll a 6 or
higher to change the attack's target to a duplicate. With
two duplicates, you must roll an 8 or higher. With one
duplicate, you must roll an 11 or higher.
A duplicate's AC equals 10 +your Dexterity modifier.
If an attack hits a duplicate, the duplicate is destroyed. A
duplicate can be destroyed only by an attack that hits it.
It ignores ali other damage and effects. The spell ends
when ali three duplicates are destroyed.
A creature is unaffected by this spell if it can't see, if it
relies on senses other than sight, such as blindsight, or
if it can perceive illusions as false, as with truesight.
MISLEAD
5th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Components: 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou become invisible at the same time that an illusory
double of you appears where you are standing. The
double lasts for the duration, but the invisibility ends if
you attack or cast a spell.
Vou can use your action to move your illusory double
up to twice your speed and make it gesture, speak, and
behave in whatever way you choose.
Vou can see through its eyes and hear through its ears
as ifyou were located where it is. On each of your turns
as a bonus action, you can switch from using its senses
to using your own, or back again. While you are using its
senses, you are blinded and deafened in regard to your
own surroundings.
MISTY STEP
2nd-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 5elf
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Briefly surrounded by silvery mist, you teleport up to 30
feet to an unoccupied space that you can see.
MODIFY MEMORY
5th-leveI enehantment
CastingTime: Iaetion
Range:30feet
Components: V,5
Duration:Coneentration, uptoIminute
Vouattempt toreshape another ereature's memories.
Oneereature thatyouean see must make aWisdom
saving throw. Ifyouare fighting theereature, ithas
advantage onthe saving throw. Onafailed save,the
target beeomes eharmed byyoufortheduration. The
eharmed target isineapacitated and unaware ofits
surroundings, though itean stillhear you.Ifittakes any
damage oristargeted byanother spell, this spell ends,
and none ofthe target's memories are modified.
While this eharm lasts, youean affeet the target's
memory ofanevent that itexperieneed within the last
24hours and that lasted nomore than 10minutes. Vou
ean permanently eliminate alimemory ofthe event,
allow the target toreeall theeventwith perfeet c!arity
and exaeting detail, ehange itsmemory ofthe details of
the event, orereate amemory ofsome other event.
Voumust speak tothe target todeseribe how
itsmemories are affeeted, and itmust beableto
understand your language forthemodified memories to
take root. Itsmind fillsinanygaps inthe details ofyour
description. Ifthe spell ends before youhavefinished
describing the modified memories, the creature's
memory isn'taltered. Otherwise, the modified memories
take holdwhen the spell ends.
Amodified memory doesn't neeessarily affecthowa
creature behaves, particularly ifthe memory contradicts
thecreature's natural inc!inations, alignment, orbeliefs.
Anillogical modified memory, such asimplanting a
memory ofhowmuch the creature enjoyed dousing
itselfinacid, isdismissed, perhaps asabaddream. The
DMmight deem amodified memory toa nonsensical to
affectacreature inasignificant manner.
Aremove eurseorgreater restoration spellcast onthe
target restores the creature's true memory.
At Higher LeveIs. Ifyoueast this spell using aspell
slotof6th leveIorhigher, youcan alter the target's
memories ofan eventthat tookplace upto7days ago
(6thlevei),30daysago(7th levei),Iyear ago(8th levei),
oranytime inthe creature's past (9th levei).
MOONBEAM
2nd-leveI evoeation
CastingTime: Iaction
Range:120feet
Components:V,5, M(severaIseeds ofanymoonseed
plant and apieee ofopaleseent feldspar)
Duration:Concentration, upto1minute
Asilvery beam ofpale lightshines down ina5-foot-
radius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered onapointwithin
range. Untilthespell ends, dimlightfillsthecylinder.
When acreature enters thespell's area forthe first
time onaturo orstarts itsturo there, itisengulfed
inghostly liames that cause searing pain, and itmust
make aConstitution saving throw. Ittakes 2dlOradiantdamage onafailed save,orhalfasmuch damage ona
successfu Ione.
Ashapechanger makes itssaving throw with
disadvantage. Iritfails,italso instantly reverts toits
original formand can't assume adifferent formuntil it
leaves thespell's light.
Oneach ofyour turos after youcast this spell,youcan
use anaction tomovethe beam 60feetinanydirection.
At Higher LeveIs. When youcast this spell using a
spell slotof3rdleveiorhigher, thedamage increases by
ldlO foreach slotleveIabove 2nd.
MORDENKAINEN'S FAITHFUL HOUND
4th-leveI eorijuration
Casting Time: Iaction
Range:30feet
Components:V,5, M(atinysilver whistle, apieee of
bone, and athread)
Duration:8hours
Vouconjure aphantom watchdog inanunoccupied
space thatyoucan seewithin range, where itremains
forthe duration, untilyoudisrniss itasanaction, oruntil
youmovemore than 100feetawayfrom it.
The hound isinvisible toalicreatures except you
and can't beharmed. When a5mall orlarger creature
comes within 30feetofitwithout firstspeaking the
password that youspecify when youcast this spell, the
hound starts barking loudly.The hound sees invisible
creatures and can see intothe Ethereal Plane. It
ignores illusions.
Atthestart ofeach ofyour turos, the hound attempts
tobiteonecreature within 5feetofitthat ishostile
toyou.The hound's attack bonus isequal toyour
spellcasting abilitymodifier +your proficiency bonus.
Onahit,itdeals 4d8 piercing damage.
MORDENKAINEN'S MAGNIFICENT MANSION
7th-leveI eonjuration
CastingTime: Iminute
Range:300 feet
Components:V,5, M(aminiature portal carved from
ivory,asmall piece ofpolished marble, and atiny
silver spoon, each itemworth atleast 5gp)
Duration:24hours
Vouconjure anextradimensional dwelling inrange
that lasts forthe duration. Vouchoose where itsone
entrance islocated. The entrance shimmers faintly
and is5feetwide and 10feettall.Vouand anycreature
youdesignate when youcast thespell can enter the
extradimensional dwelling aslongasthe portal remains
open. Voucan open orc!ose the portal ifyouare within
30feetofit.While c!osed, the portal isinvisible.
Beyond the portal isarnagnificent foyerwith
numerous ehambers beyond. The atmosphere isc!ean,
fresh, andwarm.
Voucan create any1I00rplanyoulike,butthespace
can't exceed 50cubes, each cube being 10feeton
each side.The place isfuroished and decorated as
youchoose. ltcontains sufficient foodtoserve anine-
course banquet forupto100people. Astaffof100
near-transparent servants attends aliwho enter. Vou
PART 3 SPELLS
261
PART 3 ISPELLSdecide the visual appearance ofthese servants and their
attire. They are completely obedient toyour orders.
Each servant can perform any task a normal human
servant could perform, but they can't attack or take
any action that would directly harm another creature.
Thus the servants can fetch things, clean, mend, fold
clothes. light tires. serve food, pour wine, and so on.
The servants can go anywhere in the mansion but
can't leave it. Furnishings and other objects created
bythis spell dissipate into smoke ifremoved from the
mansion. When the spell ends, any creatures inside
the extradimensional space are expelled into the open
spaces nearest to the entrance.
MORDENKAINEN'S PRIVATE SANCTUM
4th.level abjuration
Casting Time: 10minutes
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(a thin sheet oflead, a piece
ofopaque glass. a wad ofcotton or cloth, and
powdered chrysolite)
Duration: 24 hours
Voumake an area within range magically secure. The
area is a cube that can be as small as 5 feet to as large
as 100 feel on each side. The spelllasts for the duralion
or unlil you use an aclion to dismiss it.
When you cast the spell, you decide whal sorl of
securily the spell provides, choosing any or ali ofthe
following properties:
Sound can't pass through lhe barrier aI the edge of
the warded area.
The barrier ofthe warded area appears dark and foggy,
preventing vision (including darkvision) through il.
Sensors created bydivinalion spells can't appear
inside the protected area or pass through the barrier
aI ils peri meter.
Creatures in the area can't be targeted bydivinalion
spells.
Nothing can teleport into or oul oflhe warded area.
Planar traveI is blocked within the warded area.
Casling this spell on the same spot every day for a
year makes this effect permanent.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slol of 5th levei or higher, you can increase the size
ofthe cube by 100 feet for each slot leveIbeyond 4th.
Thus you could protect a cube that can be up lO200 feet
on one side by using a spell slot of 5th leveI.
MORDENKAINEN'S SWORD
7th-Je.-elevocalion
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 60 feet
Componenls: V. 5,M(a minialure platinum sword wilh
a grip and pommel ofcopper and zinc, worth 250 gp)
Duration: Concentralion, up to 1minute
Voucreate a sword-shaped plane of force that hovers
within range. It lasts for the duration.
When the sword appears, you make a melee spell
attack against a targel ofyour choice within 5 feet ofthe
sword. On a hit. the target takes 3d10force damage.
Until the spell ends, you can use abonus action oneach
ofyour turns tomove the sword up to20 feet toaspot
you can see and repeat this attack against the same
target or adifferent one.
MOVE EARTH
6th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(an iron blade and asmall bag
containing amixture ofsoils-c1ay, loam, and sand)
Duration: Concentration, up to2hours
Choose an area ofterrain no larger than 40 feet on a
side within range. Voucan reshape dirt, sand, or c1ay
inthe area inany manner you choose forthe duration.
Voucan raise or lower the area's e1evation, create or fill
inatrench, erect orf1attenawall, or form apillar. The
extent ofany such changes can't exceed half the area's
largest dimensiono So, ifyou affect a40-foot square,
you can create apillar up to20 feet high, raise or lower
the square's e1evation byup to20 feet, digatrench up
to20 feet deep, and so on. Ittakes 10minutes forthese
changes tocomplete.
Atthe end ofevery 10minutes you spend
concentrating on the spell, you can choose anew area of
terrain toaffecl.
Because the terrain's transformation occurs slowly,
creatures inthe area can't usually be trapped or injured
bythe ground's movemenl.
This spell can't manipulate natural stone or
stone construction. Rocks and structures shift to
accommodate the new terrain. Irthe wayyou shape
the terrain would make astructure unstable, it
might collapse.
Similarly, this spell doesn't directly affect plant
growth. The moved earth carries any plants along with il.
NONDETECTlON
3rd-Ievel abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(apinch ofdiamond dust
worth 25 gp sprinkled over the target, which the
spell consumes)
Duration: 8hours
For the duration, you hide atarget that you touch
from divination magic. The target can beawilling
creature or aplace or an object no larger than 10
feet inany dimensiono The target can't be targeted by
any divination magic or perceived through magical
scrying sensors.
NYSTUL'S MAGIC AURA
2nd-leveI illusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(asmall square ofsilk)
Duration: 24 hoursVouplace an illusion on acreature or an object
you touch so that divination spells reveal false
information about il.The target can beawilling
creature or an object that isn't being carried orworn by
another creature.
When you cast the spell, choose one or both ofthe
following effects. The effect lasts forthe duration. Iryou
cast this spell on the same creature or object every day
for 30 days, placing the same effect on Iteach time, the
illusion lasts until itisdispelled.
False Aura. Vouchange the waythe target appears
tospells and magical effects, such as detect magic,
that detect magical auras. Voucan make anonmagical
object appear magical, amagical object appear
nonmagical, or change the object's magical aura so that
itappears tobelong toaspecific school ofmagic that
you choose. When you use lhis effect on an object, you
can make the false magic apparent toany creature that
handles the item.
Mask.Vouchange the way the target appears tospells
and magical effects that detect creature types, such as a
paladin's Divine Sense or the trigger ofa symbolspe11.
Vouchoose acreature type and other spells and magical
effects treat the target as ifitwere acreature ofthat
type orofthat alignmenl.
OTlLUKE'S FREEZING SPHERE
6th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,S, M(asmall crystal sphere)
Duration: Instantaneous
Afrigid globe ofcold energy streaks from your fingertips
toapoint ofyour choice within range, where itexplodes
ina60-foot-radius sphere. Each creature within the
area must make aConstitution saving throw. Ona
failed save, acreature takes IOd6cold damage. On a
successful save, ittakes half as much damage.
Irthe globe strikes abody ofwater or aliquid that is
principally water (notinc1uding water-based creatures),
itfreezes the liquid toadepth of6inches over an area
30 feet square. This ice lasts for I minute. Creatures
that were swimming on the surface offrozen water are
trapped inthe ice.Atrapped creature can use an action
tomake aStrength check against your spell save DC
tobreakfree.
Voucan refrain from firing the globe after completing
lhe spcll, ifyou wish. Asmall globe about the size of
asling stone, cool tothe touch, appears inyour hand.
Atany time, you or acreature you givethe globe to
can throw the globe (toarange of40 feet)or hurl it
with asling (tothe sling's normal range). Itshatlers
on impact, with lhe same effect as the normal casting
ofthe spell. Voucan also set the globe down without
shattering il.After 1minute, ifthe globe hasn't already
shattered, itexplodes.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of7th leveior higher, lhe damage increases by
ld6 foreach slot leveiabove 6th.
?ART 3 S?ELLS
OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE
4th-levei evocation
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 30feet
Components: V,S,M(ahemispherical pieceof
clear crystal and amatching hemispherical piece
ofgum arabic)
Duration: Concentration. upto Iminute
Asphere ofshimmering forceencloses acreature
ar object ofLarge sizear smaller within range. An
unwilling creature must make aDexterity saving
throw. Onafailedsave.the creature isenclosed for
the duration.
Nothing-not physical objects. energy.ar other spell
effects-can pass through the barrier. inar out.though
acreature inthe sphere can breathe there. The sphere
isimmune toalidamage. and acreature orobject inside
can't bedamaged byattacks oreffectsoriginating from
outside, norcan acreature inside thesphere damage
anything outside it.
The sphere isweightless andjust large enough to
contain the creature orobject inside.Anenclosed
creature can use itsaction topush against the sphere's
walls and thus rollthe sphere atuptohalfthe creature's
speed. Similarly, the globecan bepickedupand moved
byother creatures.
Adisintegrate spell targeting the globedestroys it
without harming anything inside it.
OTTO'S IRRESISTIBLE DANCE
6th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration. upto I minute
Choose onecreature thatyoucan see within range. The
target begins acomicdance inplace:shuffling,tapping
itsfeet,and capering forthe duration. Creatures that
can't becharmed are immune tothis spell.
Adancing creature must use aliitsmovement to
dance without leavingitsspace and has disadvantage
onDexterity saving throws and attack rolls.While
the target isaffected bythis spell, other creatures
haveadvantage onattack rollsagainst it.Asan
action, adancing creature makes aWisdom saving
throw toregain control ofitself.Onasuccessful save.
thespell ends.
PASS WITHOUT TRACE
2nd-levei abjuration
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: Self
Components: V.S,M(ashes fromaburned leafof
mistletoe anelasprig ofspruce)
Duration: Concentration, upto1hour
Aveilofshadows and silence radiates fromyou,
masking youandyourcompanions fromdetection.
Forthe duration. each creature youchoose within 30
feetofyou(includingyou)has a+10bonus toDexterity
PART 3 ISPELLS(Stealth) checks and can't betracked except bymagical
means. Acreature that receives this bonus leaves
behind notracks arother traces ofitspassage.
PASSWALL
5th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30feet
Components: V.S.M(apinchofsesame seeds)
Duration: Ihour
Apassage appears atapointofyourchoice thatyou
can see onawooden. plaster. orstone surface (suchas
awall,aceiling,orafloor)within range, and lasts for
the duration. Vouchoose the opening's dimensions: up
to5feetwide.8feettall,and 20 feetdeep.The passage
creates noinstability inastructure surrounding it.
When the opening disappears, anycreatures or
objects stillinthe passage created bythespell are safely
ejected toanunoccupied space nearest tothesurface on
whichyoucast thespell.
PHANTASMAL FORCE
2nd-levei i11usion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.S. M(abitoffleece)
Duration: Concentration. upto I minute
Voucraft anillusion that takes rootinthe mind ofa
creature thatyoucansee within range. The target must
make anIntelligence saving throw. Onafailedsave,you
create aphantasmal object,creature. orother visible
phenomenon ofyourchoice that isnolarger than a
lO-footcube and that isperceivable onlytothe target
forthe duration. This spell has noeffectonundead
ar constructs.
Thephantasm includessound, temperature. andother
stimuli, alsoevidentonlytothecreature.
The target can use itsaction toexamine the phantasm
withan Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell save DC.Ifthe check succeeds, the target realizes
that the phantasm isanillusion,and the spell ends.
Whileatarget isaffected bythe spell,the target treats
the phantasm as ifitwere real. The target rationalizes
anyillogicaloutcomes frominteracting withthe
phantasm. Forexample. atarget attempting towalk
across aphantasmal bridge that spans achasm falls
once itsteps anta the bridge. ]fthe target survives the
fali,itstillbelieves that the bridge exists and comes up
with some other explanation foritsfall-it was pushed,
itslipped, ar astrong wind might haveknocked itoff.
Anaffected target issoconvinced ofthe phantasm's
reality that itcan eventake damage fromthe illusion.A
phantasm created toappear asacreature can attack the
target. Similarly. aphantasm created toappear as tire.a
poolofacid.ar lavacan burn the target. Each round on
yourturn. thephantasm can deal Id6 psychicdamage
tothe target ifitisinthe phantasm's area ar within 5
feetofthe phantasm, provided that the illusion isofa
creature ar hazard that couldlogicallydeal damage.
such asbyattacking. The target perceives the damage
asatypeappropriate tothe illusion.
PHANTASMAL KILLER
4th-leveI illusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Voutap into the nightmares ofacreature you can see
within range and create an illusory manifestation ofits
deepest fears, visible only tothat creature. The target
must make aWisdom saving throw. On a failed save,
the target becomes frightened forthe duration. Atthe
start ofeach ofthe target's turns before the spell ends,
the target must succeed on aWisdom saving throw
ar take 4d10psychic damage. On asuccessful save,
the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of5th leveiar higher, the damage increases by
ldlO foreach slot leveiabove 4th.
PHANTOM STEED
3rd-/evel iIIusion (ritual)
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1hour
ALarge quasi-real, horselike creature appears on
the ground inan unoccupied space ofyour choice
within range. Voudecide the creature's appearance,
but itisequipped with asaddle, bit. and bridle. Any
ofthe equipment created bythe spell vanishes ina
puff ofsmoke ifitiscarried more than 10feet away
from the steed.
For the duration, you or a creature you choose can
ride the steed. The creature uses the statistics fora
riding horse, except ithas a speed of 100 feet and can
travei 10miles in an hour, or 13miles at afast pace.
When the spell ends. the steed gradually fades. giving
the rider 1minute todismount. The spell ends ifyou use
an action todismiss itar ifthe steed takes any damage.
PLANARALLY
6th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 10minutes
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Voubeseech an otherworldly entity foraid. The being
must be known toyou: agod. aprimordial, ademon
prince, ar some other being ofcosmic power. That entity
sends acelestial, an elemental. ar a fiend loyaltoitto
aid you, making the creature appear inan unoccupied
space within range. Ifyou know aspecific crcature's
name. you can speak that name when you cast this spell
torequest that creature, though you might get adifferent
creature anyway (DM's choice).
When the creature appears. itisunder nocompulsion
tobehave inany particular way.Voucan ask the
creature toperform aservice inexchange forpayment,
but itisn't obligcd todoso. The rcquested task could
range from simple (flyus across the chasm, or hclp us
fight abattle) tocomplex (spyon our enemies. or protectus during our foray into the dungeon). Voumust be
abJetocommunicate with the creature tobargain for
its services.
Payment can take avariety offorms. Acelestial might
require asizable donation ofgold ar magic items to
an allied temple. while a fiend might demand aliving
sacrifice or agift oftreasure. Some creatures might
exchange their service for aquest undertaken byyou.
Asa rule ofthumb, atask that can be measured in
minutes requires a payment worth 100gp per minute. A
task measured inhours requires 1,000 gpper hour. And
atask measured indays (upto 10days) requires 10.000
gp per day.The DMcan adjust these payments based on
the circumstances under which you cast the spel!. Ifthe
task isaligned with the creature's ethos, the payment
might be halved or even waived. Nonhazardous tasks
typically require only half the suggested payment, while
especially dangerous tasks might require agreater gift.
Creatures rarely accept tasks that seem suicida!'
After the creature completes the task, or when the
agreed-upon duration ofservice expires, the creature
returns toits home plane after reporting back toyou.
ifappropriate tothe task and ifpossible. ]fyouare
unable toagree on aprice forthe creature's service, the
creature immediately returns toits home plane.
Acreature enlisted tojoin your group counts as
a member ofit,receiving afull share ofexperience
points awarded.
PLANAR BINDING
5th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1hour
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.S. M(ajewel worth at least 1.000 gP.
which the spell consumes)
Duration: 24 hours
With this spell, you attempt tobind acelestial. an
elemental. a fey.or afiend toyour service. The creature
must bewithin range for the entire casting ofthe spel!.
(Typically. the creature isfirst summoned into the center
ofan inverted magie eircle inarder to keep ittrapped
while this spell iscast.) Atthe completion ofthe casting,
the target must make aCharisma saving throw. On a
failed save, itisbound toserve you for the duration. If
the creature was summoned ar created byanother spell.
that spell's duration isextended tomatch the duration
ofthis spel!.
Abound creature must followyour instructions tothe
best ofits ability. Voumight command the creature to
accompany you on an adventure. toguard alocation. or
todeliver amessage. The creature obeys the letter of
your instructions. but ifthe creature ishostiletoyou. it
strives totwist your words toachieve its own objectives.
]fthe creature carries out your instructions completely
before the spell ends, ittravels toyou toreport this fact
ifyou are on the same plane ofexistence. Ifyou are on a
different plane ofexistence. itreturns tothe place where
you bound itand remains there until the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When YOllcast this spellllsing a
spell slot ofa higher levei, the duration increases to 10
days with a 6th-levei slot, to 30 days with a 7th-levei slot.
to 180 days with an 8th-levei slot. and toayear and a
daywith a9th-levei spell slot.
PART 3ISPELLS
266PLANE SHIFT
7th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(aforked, metal rod worth at least
250 gp,attuned toa particular plane ofexistence)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouand up toeight willing creatures who link hands in
a circle are transported toa different plane ofexistence.
Voucan specify a target destination in general terms,
such as the CityofBrass on the Elemental Plane of
Fire or the palace ofDispater on the second leveiofthe
Nine Hells, and you appear inor near that destination.
Iryou are trying to reach the CityofBrass, forexample,
you might arrive inits Street ofSteel, before its Gate of
Ashes, or looking at the city from across the Sea ofFire,
at the DM'sdiscretion.
Alternatively, ifyou know the sigilsequence ofa
teleportation circle on another plane ofexistence, this
spell can take you tothat circle. Irthe teleportation
circle is too small to hold ali the creatures you
transported, they appear in the closest unoccupied
spaces next tothe circle.
Voucan use this spell tobanish an unwilling creature
toanother plane. Choose a creature within your reach
and make a melee spell attack against it.On a hit,the
creature must make a Charisma saving throw. Irthe
creature fails this save, itis transported toa random
location on the plane ofexistence you specify.Acreature
so transported must findits own wayback toyour
current plane ofexistence.
PLANT GROWTH
3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: I action or 8 hours
Range: 150feet
Components: V,S
Duration: lnstantaneous
This spell channels vitalityinto plants within a specific
area. There are two possible uses forthe spell, granting
either immediate or long-term benefits.
Ifyou cast this spell using I action, choose a point
within range. Alinormal plants in a 100-footradius
centered on that point become thick and overgrown. A
creature moving through the area must spend 4 feet of
movement forevery I footitmoves.
Voucan exclude one or more areas ofanysize within
the spell's area from being affected.
Ifyou cast this spell over 8 hours, you enrich the
land. Aliplants ina half-mile radius centered on a point
within range become enriched for Iyear. The plants
yield twice the normal amount offoodwhen harvested.
POISON SPRAY
Conjuration cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 10feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
PART 3 ISPELLSVouextend your hand toward a creature you can see
within range and project a puffofnoxious gas fromyour
paIm. The creature must succeed on a Constitution
saving throw ar take Idl2 poison damage.
This spell's damage increases byIdl2 when you reach
5th leveI(2dI2), 11thlevei(3dI2), and 17thleveI(4dI2).
POLYMORPH
4th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(acaterpillar cocoon)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
This spelltransforms acreature thatyoucan see
within range into a new formoAn unwilling creature
must make a Wisdom saving throw toavoidthe
effect.Ashapechanger automatically succeeds onthis
saving throw.
The transformation lasts forthe duration, or until
the target drops to Ohit points ar dies. The new form
can be any beast whose challenge rating is equal toor
less than the target's (orthe target's leveI,ifitdoesn't
have a challenge rating). The target's game statistics,
including mental ability scores, are replaced bythe
statistics ofthe chosen beast. Itretains its alignment
and personality.
The target assumes the hit points ofits new formo
When itreverts toits normal form, the creature
returns to the number ofhit points ithad before it
transformed. Ifitreverts as a result ofdropping to
Ohit points, anyexcess damage carries over toits
normal formoAs longas the excess damage doesn't
reduce the creature's normal form to Ohitpoints, itisn't
knocked unconscious.
The creature is limited in the actions itcan perform by
the nature ofits new form, and itcan't speak, cast spells,
ar take anyother action that requires hands ar speech.
The target's gear melds into the new formoThe
creature can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benefit
from any ofits equipment.
POWER WORD HEAL
9th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Awave ofhealing energy washes over the creature
you touch. The target regains ali its hit points. Ifthe
creature is charmed, frightened, paralyzed, ar stunned,
the condition ends. Ifthe creature is prone, itcan use its
reaction tostand up.This spell has no effecton undead
ar constructs.
POWER WORD KILL
9th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouutter awordofpowerthat can compel onecreature
youcan see within range todieinstantly. lfthe
creature youchoose has 100hitpoints orfewer.itdies.
Otherwise. the spell has noeffect.
POWER WORD STUN
8th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: Iaction
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouspeak awordofpower that can overwhelm the
mindofonecreature youcan see within range. leaving
itdumbfounded. lfthe target has 150hitpoints orfewer.
itisstunned. Otherwise. the spell has noeffect.
Thestunned target must make aConstitution saving
thraw atthe end ofeach ofitsturns. Onasuccessful
save.this stunning effectends.
PRAYER OF HEALING
2nd-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 10minutes
Range: 30feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Uptosixcreatures ofyourchoicethatyoucansee
within range each regain hitpoints equal to2d8 +your
spellcasting abilitymoditier. This spell has noeffecton
undead orconstructs.
At Higher Leve/s. When youcast this spell using a
spell slotof3rdleveiorhigher. the healing increases by
ld8 foreach slotleveIabove2nd.
PRESTIDIGITATION
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 10feet
Components: V.S
Duration: Upto I hour
This spell isaminor magical trickthat novice
spellcasters use forpractice. Voucreate oneofthe
followingmagical effectswithin range:
Voucreate an instantaneous. harmless sensory effect.
suchas ashower ofsparks. apuffofwind. faintmusi-
calnotes. oranoddodor.
Vouinstantaneously lightorsnuffoutacandle. a
torch. orasmall camptire.
Vouinstantaneously dean orsoilanobject nolarger
than 1cubicfool.
Vouchill.warm. orflavoruptoI cubicfootofnonliv-
ingmaterial forIhour.
Voumake acolor.asmall mark. orasymbolappear
onanobjectar asurface forIhour.
Voucreate anonmagical trinket oraniIlusoryimage
that can titinyourhand and that lasts untilthe end of
yournext turno
lfyou cast this spell multiple times. YOllcan have IIpto
three ofitsnon-instantaneous effectsacliveatatime.
andyoucan dismiss such aneffectasanaction.PRISMATIC SPRAY
7th.level evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self(60-footcone)
Components: V.S
Duration: Instantaneous
Eight multicolored raysoflightflashframyourhand.
Each rayisadifferent colorand has adifferent power
and purpose. Eachcreature ina60-footcone must
make aDexterity saving thraw. Foreach target. rollad8
todetermine whichcolorrayaffectsil.
1.Red.The target takes IOd6tiredamage onafailed
save.orhalfas muchdamage onasuccessful one.
2. Orange.The target takes IOd6aciddamage ona
failedsave.orhalfasmuchdamage onasuccessful one.
3. Yellow.Thetargettakes IOd6lightning damage ona
failedsave.orhalfasmuchdamageonasuccessful one.
4. Green.The target takes IOd6poison damage ona
failedsave.orhalfasmuchdamageonasuccessful one.
5. B/ue.The target takes IOd6colddamage onafailed
save,orhalfas muchdamage onasuccessful one.
6.
Indigo.Onafailedsave.the target isrestrained.
ltmust then make aConstitution saving thraw atthe
end ofeach ofitsturns. Ifitsuccessfully saves three
times. the spell ends. Ifitfailsitssavethree times.
itpermanently turns tostone and issubjected tothe
petritied condition. Thesuccesses and failures don't
need tobeconsecutive; keep track ofboth untilthe
target collects three ofakind.
7. Vio/et,Onafailedsave,the target isblinded. lt
must then make aWisdom saving throw atthestart of
yournextturnoAsuccessful saveends the blindness. lf
itfailsthat save,the creature istransported toanother
plane ofexistence ofthe DM'schoosing and isnolonger
blinded. (Typically,acreature that isonaplane that isn't
itshome plane isbanished home.whileother creatures
are usually cast intotheAstral orEthereal planes.)
8. Specia/.The target isstruck bytworays. Rolltwice
more, rerolling any8.
PRISMATIC WALL
9th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.S
Duration: 10minutes
Ashimmering, multicolored plane oflightforms a
vertical opaque wall-up to90 feetlong.30feethigh.
and Iinchthick-centered onapointyoucan see
within range. Alternatively,youcanshape thewallinto
asphere upto30feetindiameter centered onapoint
youchoose within range. The wallremains inplace for
the duration.lfyou position thewallsothat itpasses
through aspace occupied byacreature. the spell fails.
andyouraction and thespell slotare wasted.
The wallsheds bright lightouttoarange of100
feetand dimlightforanadditional 100feel.Vouand
creatures youdesignate atthe limeyoucast thespell
can pass through and remain near thewallwithout
harm. Ifanother creature that can see thewallmovesto
within 20feetofitorstarts itstum there. the creature
PART 3ISPELLS
mustsucceed 00aCoostitutioo saviog throw orbecome
blioded forImioute.
Thewallcoosists ofseveo layers.each withadiffereot
color.Wheo acreature attempts toreach iotoorpass
through thewall,itdoes soooelayeratatimethrough
alithewall'slayers.Asitpasses orreaches through
each layer,thecreature must make aDexterity saviog
throw orbeaffectedbythat layer'sproperties as
described below.
Thewallcaobedestroyed, also ooelayeratatime,io
order fromredtoviolet,bymeaos specifictoeach layer.
Oocealayerisdestroyed, itremaios sofortheduratioo
ofthespell.A rod of cancellation destroys a prismatic
wall,butao antimagic field has00effect00it.
1.Red.Thecreature takes IOd6firedamage 00a
failedsave,orhalfasmuchdamage 00asuccessful ooe.
Whilethis layerisioplace,ooomagical raoged attacks
cao't pass through thewall.Thelayercao bedestroyed
bydealiog atleast 25colddamage toit.
2. Orange.Thecreature takes IOd6aciddamage 00
afailedsave,orhalfasmuchdamage 00asuccessful
ooe.Whilethis layerisioplace,magical raoged attacks
cao't pass through thewall.Thelayerisdestroyed by
astroog wiod.
3. YeJIow.Thecreature takes lOd6lightoiog damage
00afailedsave,orhalfasmuchdamage 00asuccessful
ooe.This layercaobedestroyed bydealiog atleast 60
forcedamage toit.
4. Green.Thecreature takes lOd6poisoodamage 00
afailedsave,ar halfasmuchdamage 00asuccessful
ooe.A passwallspell,oraoother spellofequal or
greater leveithat caoopeo aportal 00asolidsurface,
destrays this layer.
5. Blue.Thecreature takes IOd6colddamage 00a
failedsave,orhalfasmuchdamage 00asuccessful ooe.
This layercao bedestroyed bydealiog atleast 25fire
damage toit.
6. Jndigo.00afailedsave,thecreature isrestraioed.
11must theo make aCoostitutiao saviog throw atthe
eodofeach ofitsturns. lfitsuccessfully saves three
times, thespelleods. lfitfailsitssavethree times,
itpermaoeotly turos tostooe aod issubjected tothe
petrified cooditioo. Thesuccesses aodfailures doo't
needtobecoosecutive; keeptrackofbothuotilthe
creature collects three ofakiod.
Whilethis layerisioplace,spells cao't becast
through thewall.Thelayerisdestroyed bybright light
shed bya day/ightspellorasimilar spellofequal or
higher leveI.
7. Violet.00afailedsave,thecreature isblioded. 11
must theo make aWisdom saviog throw atthestart of
youroextturnoAsuccessful saveeods thebliodoess. lf
itfailsthat save,thecreature istraosported toaoother
plaoe ofthe DM'schoosiog aod is 00loogerblioded.
(Typically,acreature that is 00aplaoe that iso'tits
homeplaoe isbaoished home,whileother creatures
are usuallycast iototheAstral orEthereal plaoes.)This
layerisdestroyed bya dispel magicspellorasimilar
spellofequal orhigher leveIthatcao eodspells aod
magical effects.PRODUCE FLAME
Conjuration cantrip
Casting Time: Iactioo
Range:Self
Components: V,S
Duration: lOmioutes
Aflickeriogflameappears ioyourhand. Theflame
remaios there fortheduration aod harms oeither you
ooryourequipmeot. Theflamesheds bright lightina
10-footradius aoddimlightforanadditiooal 10feet.
Thespellends ifyoudismiss itasaoaction orifyou
cast itagain.
Voucao also attack withtheflame,although doingso
eods thespell.Wheoyoucast thisspell,orasaoaction
00alaterturn, youcao hurlthe flameatacreature
withio 30feetofyou.Makearaoged spellattack. 00a
hit,thetarget takes Id8firedamage.
Thisspell's damage iocreases byId8wheoyoureach
5thlevei(2d8),11thlevei(3d8),aod 17thlevei(4d8).
PROGRAMMED ILLUSION
6th.level illusion
Casting Time: Iactioo
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S,M(abitoffleeceandjade dustworth
atleast 25gp)
Duration: Untildispelled
Voucreate aoilIusiooofaoobject,acreature, ar
some other visiblepheoomeooo within raoge that
activates wheo aspecificcooditioooccurs. TheilIusioo
isimperceptible uotiltheo. 11mustbe00larger thaoa
30-footcube,aodyoudecidewheoyoucastthespell
howtheillusioobehavesaodwhatsouods itmakes. This
scripted performaoce cao lastupto5mioutes.
Wheo thecooditioo youspecifyoccurs, theillusioo
spriogs iotoexisteoce aod performs iothe maooer you
described. Ooce theilIusioofioishes performiog, it
disappears aodremaios dormaot for10mioutes. After
this time,theilIusioocao beactivated agaio.
Thetriggeriog cooditioo cao beasgeoeral oras
detailed asyoulike,though itmust bebased 00visual or
audible cooditioos that occur withio 30feetofthearea.
Forexample, youcouldcreate ao illusiooofyourself
toappear aodwarn offothers whoattempt toopeo a
trapped door,oryoucouldset theillusioototrigger ooly
wheo acreature says thecorrect wordorphrase.
Physical ioteractioo withtheimagereveals ittobeao
illusioo,because thiogs cao pass through it.Acreature
that uses itsactioo toexamioe theimagecao determioe
that itisao illusioowithasuccessfullotelligeoce
(fovestigatioo) checkagaiost yourspellsaveDC.lfa
creature discerns theillusiooforwhat itis,thecreature
cao see through the image,aod aoynoiseitmakes
souods hollowtothecreature.
PART 3 ISPELLS
270PROJECT IMAGE
7th-levei iIlusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 500 miles
Components: V,S, M(asmall replica ofyou made from
materiais worth at least 5gp)
Duration: Concentration, upto 1day
Voucreate an illusory copy ofyourself that lasts for
the duration. The copycan appear at any location
within range that you have seen before, regardless of
intervening obstacles. The illusion Iooksand sounds
likeyou but is intangible. Irthe illusion takes any
damage, itdisappears, and the spell ends.
Voucan use your action tomovethis illusion up to
twice your speed, and make itgesture, speak, and
behave inwhatever wayyou choose. Itmimics your
mannerisms perfectly.
Voucan see through its eyes and hear through its
ears as ifyouwere inits space. Onyour turn as abonus
action, you can switch from using its senses tousing
your own, or back again. While you are using itssenses,
you are blinded and deafened in regard toyour own
surroundings.
Physical interaction with the image reveals ittobe an
illusion, because things can pass through it.Acreature
that uses its action toexamine the image can determine
that itis an illusion with a successful Intelligence
(Investigation) check against your spell save DC.Ifa
creature discerns the illusion forwhat itis, the creature
can see through the image, and anynoise itmakes
sounds hollowto the creature.
PROTECTION FROM ENERGY
3rd-/evel abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
For the duration, the willing creature you touch has
resistance toone damage type ofyour choice: acid, cold,
fire,lightning, or thunder.
PROTECTION FROM EVIL AND GOOD
1st-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(holywater or powdered silver
and iron, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Concentration up to 10minutes
Untilthe spell ends, one willing creature you
touch is protected against certain types of
creatures: aberrations, celestiais, elementals, fey,
fiends, and undead.
The protection grants several benefits. Creatures of
those types have disadvantage on attack rolls against
the targel. The target also can't be charmed, frightened,
or possessed bythem. Irthe target is already charmed,
frightened, or possessed bysuch acreature, the target
has advantage on any new saving throw against the
relevant effecl.
PART 3 ISPELLSPROTECTlON FROM POISON
2nd-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: I hour
Voutouch acreature. Ifitispoisoned, you neutralize the
poison, Ifmore than one poison afllicts the target, you
neutralize one poison that you know is present, oryou
neutralize one at random,
For the duration, the target has advantage on saving
throws against being poisoned, and ithas resistance to
poison damage.
PURIFY FOOD AND DRINK
1st-levei transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 10feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Alinonmagical foodand drink within a 5-foot-radius
sphere centered on a point ofyour choice within range is
purified and rendered free ofpoison and disease.
RAISE DEAD
5th-levei necromancy
Casting Time: I hour
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(adiamond worth at least 500 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voureturn a dead creature you touch to life,provided
that ithas been dead nolonger than 10days. Irthe
creature's soul isboth willing and at liberty torejoin the
body,the creature returns tolifewith I hitpoinl.
This spell also neutralizes any poisons and cures
nonmagical diseases that affected the creature at the
time itdied. This spell doesn't, however, remove magical
diseases, curses, or similar effects; ifthese aren't first
removed prior tocasting the spell, they take effectwhen
the creature returns tolife.The spell can't return an
undead creature tolife.
This spell closes ali mortal wounds, but itdoesn't
restore missing body parts. Irthe creature is lacking
body parts or organs integral forits survival-its head,
forinstance-the spell automatically fails.
Coming back from the dead is an ordeal. The target
takes a-4penalty toali attack rolls, saving throws, and
ability checks. Every time the target finishes a long rest,
the penalty is reduced by1until itdisappears.
RARY'S TELEPATHIC BOND
5th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(pieces ofeggshell from two
different kinds ofcreatures)
Duration: I hour
Vouforge a telepathic link among uptoeight willing
creatures ofyour choice within range, psychically
The reincarnated creature recalls its former life
and experiences. It retains the capabilities it had in its
original form, except it exchanges its original race for
the new one and changes its racial traits accordingly.Vou touch a creature and stimulate its natural healing
ability. The target regains 4d8 +15 hit points. For the
duration of the spell, the target regains I hit point at the
start of each of its turns (10 hit points each minute).
The target's severed body members (fingers, legs,
tails, and so on), if any, are restored after 2 minutes.
If you have the severed part and hold it to the stump,
the spell instantaneously causes the limb to knit
to the stump.
REMOVE CURSE
3rd./evel abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
At your touch, all curses affecting one creature ar
object end. If the object is a cursed magic item, its curse
remains, but the spell breaks its owner's attunement to
the object so it can be removed ar discarded.REINCARNATE
5th./evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (rare oils and unguents worth at
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou touch a dead humanoid ar a piece of a dead
humanoid. Provided that the creature has been dead no
longer than 10 days, the spell forms a new adult body
for it and then calls the soul to enter that body. If the
target's soul isn't free or willing to do so, the spell fails.
The magic fashions a new body for the creature
to inhabit, which likely causes the creature's race to
change. The DM rolls a dlOO and consults the following
table to determine what form the creature takes when
restored to life, ar the DM chooses a formo
Raee
Dragonborn
Dwarf, hill
Dwarf, mountain
Elf, dark
Elf, high
Elf, wood
Gnome, forest
Gnome, rock
Half.elf
Haif.ore
Halfiing,lightfoot
Haifiing, stout
Human
TiefiingdlOO
01-04
05-13
14-21
22-25
26-34
35-42
43-46
47-52
53-56
57-60
61-68
69-76
77-96
97-00RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT
2nd./evel necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A black beam of enervating energy springs fram your
finger toward a creature within range. Make a ranged
spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target deals
only half damage with weapon attacks that use 5trength
until the spell ends.
At the end of each of the target's turns, it can make
a Constitution saving throw against the spell. On a
success, the spell ends.
RAY OF FROST
Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
A frigid beam of blue-white light streaks toward a
creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack
against the target. On a hit, it takes ld8 cold damage,
and its speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of
your next turno
The spell's damage increases by Id8 when you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
RAY OF SICKNESS
1st-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
A ray of sickening greenish energy lashes out toward
a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack
against the target. On a hit, the target takes 2d8 poison
damage and must make a Constitution saving throw.
On a failed save, it is also poisoned until the end of
your next turno
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each slot levei above 1st.linking each creature to all the others for the duration.
Creatures with Intelligence scores of 2 ar less aren't
affected by this spell.
Until the spell ends, the targets can communicate
telepathically thraugh the bond whether ar not they have
a common language. The communication is possible
over any distance, though it can't extend to other planes
of existence.
REGENERATE
7th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a prayer wheel and holy water)
Duration: 1 hour
P\RT 3 SPELLS
2~1
272RESlSTANCE
Abjuration cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S,M(aminialure doak)
Duration: Concenlralion, uplo I minule
Voulouch one willing crealure. Once before lhe spell
ends, lhe largel can rollad4and add lhe number
ralled loonesaving lhraw ofilschoice. Itcan rall
lhe die before orafler making lhe saving lhraw. The
spelllhen ends.
RESURRECTION
7th-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: I hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, S,M(adiamond worlh alleasl 1,000
gp,which lhe spell consumes)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Voulouch adead crealure lhal has been dead forno
more than acenlury, lhal didn'l dieofoldage,and lhal
isn'l undead. IfilSsoul isfree and willing,lhe largel
relurns lolifewith aliilshilpoinls.
This spell neulralizes anypoisons and cures normal
diseases affticlinglhe creature when ildied. Itdoesn'l,
however,remove magical diseases. curses, and lhe like;
ifsuch effeclsaren'l removed prior locasling the spell,
lheyaffticllhe largel onilsrelurn lolife.
This spell doses alimorlal wounds and reslores any
missing bodyparis.
Coming back fromlhe dead isan ordeal. The largel
lakes a-4 penally lOaliallack rolls,saving lhrows, and
abililychecks. Everylime lhe largel finishes alongresl,
the penally isreduced byI unlil ildisappears.
Casling lhis spelllo reslore lifelOacrealure lhat has
been dead foroneyear orlonger laxes yougreally.Unlil
youfinishalongresl, youcan'l casl spells again, and
youhavedisadvanlage onaliallack rolls, abililychecks,
and saving lhrows.
REVERSE GRAVITY
7th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 100feel
Components: V, S,M(alodeslone and iran filings)
Duration: Concenlralion, uplOI minule
Thisspellreverses gravilyina50-fool-radius,100-
foolhighcylindercenlered onapoinlwilhinrange.Ali
crealures andobjeclsthalaren'l somehowanchored lo
theground inlhearea faliupward andreach lhelopof
lhearea whenyoucasllhis spell.Acrealure canmakea
Dexlerilysavingthrawlograbonloafixedobjeclilcan
reach,lhusavoidinglhefalI.
lfsome solid objecl(such as aceiling) isencounlered
inlhis fali,faIlingobjecls and crealures slrike iljuSlas
lheywould during anormal downward falI.Ifan objecl
orcrealure reaches lhe lopoflhe area wilhoul slriking
anylhing, ilremains lhere, oscillaling slighlly,for
lhe duralion.
AIlhe end oflhe duralion, affecled objecls and
crealures faliback down.
PART 3ISPELLSREVIVIFY
3rd-level conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S,M(diamonds worlh 300 gp,which
lhe spell consumes)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Voulouch acrealure lhal has died wilhin lhe lasl
minule. Thal crealure relurns lolifewilh I hilpoinl.
This spell can'l relurn lolifeacrealure lhal has died of
oldage,norcan ilreslore anymissing bodyparIs.
ROPE TRICK
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V, S,M(powdered corn exlracl and a
lwisted loopofparchmenl)
Duration: I hour
Voutouch alength ofrape lhat isuplo60feellong.
One end oflhe rope then rises inlolhe air unlillhe
whole rope hangs perpendicular lolhe ground. AIlhe
upper end ofthe rope, an invisibleenlrance opens loan
exlradimensional space lhallasls unlillhe spell ends.
The extradimensional space can bereached by
dimbing lolhe topoflhe rope. The space can holdas
manyas eighl Medium orsmaller creatures. The rope
can bepulled inlolhe space, making lhe rape disappear
fromviewoulside lhe space,
Allacks and spells can'l crass lhrough lhe enlrance
intoorouloflhe exlradimensional space, bullhose
inside can see oulofilas iflhrough a3-foOl-by-5-fool
window cenlered onlhe rope.
Anylhing inside lhe exlradimensional space drops oul
when lhe spell ends.
SACRED FLAME
Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Flame.like radiance descends onacreature lhal you
can see wilhin range. The largel musl succeed ona
Dexterily saving throw ortake Id8 radianl damage. The
largel gains nobenefil fromcoverforlhis saving lhrow.
The spell's damage increases byId8 when youreach
51hlevei(2d8), Illh levei(3d8),and 171hleveI(4d8).
SANCTUARY
Ist./evel abjuration
Casting Time: I bonus aclion
Range: 30feet
Components: V, S,M(asmall silver mirror)
Duration: I minule
Vouward acrealure within range againsl allack. Unlil
lhe spell ends, anycrealure wholargels lhe warded
crealure wilh an allack oraharmful spell musl firsl
make aWisdom saving lhrow. Onafailedsave,the
creature musl choose anew largel orlose lhe allack
or spell. This spell doesn't protect the warded creature
from area effects, such as the explosion of a fireball.
Ifthe warded creature makes an attack or casts a spell
that affects an enemy creature, this spell ends.
On a successful save. the target isn't affected. and you
can't use this spell against it again for 24 hours.
On a failed save. the spell creates an invisible sensor
within 10feet ofthe target. Voucan see and hear through
the sensor as ifyou were there. The sensor moves with
lhe target, remaining within 10feet of itfor the duration.
Acreature that can see invisible objects sees the sensor
as a luminous orb about the size ofyour fist.
Instead of targeting a creature. you can choose a
location you have seen before as the target of this spell.
When you do, the sensor appcars al that location and
doesn't move.SCORCHING RAY
2nd./evel evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range:120 feet
Components: V.S
Duration: Instantaneous
Voucreate three rays of fire and hurJ them at targets
within range. Voucan hurJ them at one target or several.
Make a ranged spell attack for each ray. On a hit, the
target takes 2d6 fire damage.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher. you create one additional
ray for each slot leveI above 2nd.
Save Modifier
-2
-4
-10Save Modifier
+s
+0
-sKnowledge
Secondhand (you have heard of the target)
Firsthand (you have met the target)
Familiar (you know the target well)
Connection
Likeness or picture
Possession ar garment
Body parto lock of hair. bit of nail, or the likeSCRYING
5th-leveI divination
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range:Self
Components: V.S. M(a focus worth at least 1.000 gp.
such as a crystal ball, a silver mirror, or a font filled
with holy water)
Duration: Concentration. up to laminutes
Voucan see and hear a particular creature you choose
that is on the same plane of existence as you. The target
must make a Wisdom saving throw, which is modified
by how well you know the target and the sort of physical
connection you have to it. Jfa target knows you're
casting this spell, it can fail the saving throw voluntarily
if itwants to be observed.
SEARING SMITE
1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hit acreature with a melee weapon
attack during the spell's duration, your weapon flares
with white.hot intensity, and the attack deals an extra
Id6 tire damage to the target and causes the target to
ignite inflames. Atthe start ofeach ofits turns until
the spell ends, the target must make a Constitution
saving throw. Ona failed save, ittakes Id6 tire damage.
On a successful save, the spell ends. lf the target or a
creature within 5feet ofituses an action toput out the
flames, or ifsome other effect douses the flames (such
as the target being submerged inwater), the spell ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of2nd leveIor higher, the initial extra damage
dealt bythe attack increases byId6 foreach slot
leveIabove 1st.
SEE INVISIBILITY
2nd./eveI divination
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeIf
Components: V,S, M(apinch oftale and a small
sprinkling ofpowdered silver)
Duration: I hour
For the duration, you see invisible creatures and objects
as ifthey were visible, and you can see into the Ethereal
Plane. Ethereal creatures and objects appear ghostly
and translucent.
SEEMING
5th./evel iJJusion
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 8 hours
This spell allows you tochange the appearance ofany
number ofcreatures that you can see within range. Vou
giveeach target you choose a new,iIIusoryappearance.
Anunwilling target can make a Charisma saving throw,
and ifitsucceeds, itis unaffected bythis spell.
The spell disguises physical appearance as well as
clothing, armor, weapons, and equipment. Voucan make
each creature seem I footshorter or taller and appear
thin, fat,or in between. Voucan't change a target's body
type, so you must choose a form that has the same
basic arrangement oflimbs. Otherwise, the extent of
the illusion is up toyou. The spell lasts forthe duration,
unless you use your action todismiss itsooner.
The changes wrought bythis spell failto hold upto
physical inspection. For example, ifyou use this spell
toadd a hat toa creature's outtit, objects pass through
the hat, and anyone who touches itwould feelnothing
or would feelthe creature's head and hair. Ifyou use
this spell toappear thinner than you are, the hand of
PART 3 ISPELLSsomeone who reaches out to touch you would bump into
you while itwas seemingly still in midair.
Acreature can use its action to inspect a target and
make an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell save DC.Ifitsucceeds, itbecomes aware that the
target is disguised.
SENDING
3rd./eveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Unlimited
Components: V,S, M(ashort piece oftine copper wire)
Duration: I round
Vousend a short message oftwenty-tivewords or
less toa creature with which you are familiar. The
creature hears the message in its mind, recognizes
you as the sender ifitknows you, and can answer ina
like manner immediately. The spell enables creatures
with Intelligence scores ofat least I tounderstand the
meaning ofyour message.
Voucan send the message across anydistance and
even toother planes ofexistence, but ifthe target ison a
different plane than you, there is a 5 percent chance that
the message doesn't arrive.
SEQUESTER
7th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(apowder composed ofdiamond,
emerald, ruby,and sapphire dust worth at least 5,000
gp,which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
Bymeans ofthis spell, awilling creature or an object
can be hidden away,safe from detection forthe
duration. When you cast the spell and touch the target,
itbecomes invisible and can't be targeted bydivination
spells or perceived through scrying sensors created by
divination spells.
Ifthe target is a creature, itfalls into a state of
suspended animation. Time ceases toflowforit,and it
doesn't grow older.
Voucan set a condition forthe spell toend early.
The condition can be anything you choose, but it
must occur or be visible within I mile ofthe target.
Examples include "after 1,000 years" or "when the
tarrasque awakens." This spell also ends ifthe target
takes any damage.
SHAPECHANGE
9th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M(ajade circlet worth at least 1,500
gp,which you must place onyour head before you
cast the spell)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vouassume the form ofa different creature forthe
duration. The new form can be ofanycreature with
a challenge rating equal toyour leveIor lower.The
creature can't be a construct or an undead, and you
must have seen the sort of creature at least once. Vou
transform into an average example of that creature, one
without any c1ass leveis or the Spellcasting trait.
Vour game statistics are replaced by the statistics
of the chosen creature, though you retain your
alignment and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma
scores. Voualso retain ali of your skill and saving
throw proficiencies, in addition to gaining those of the
creature. If the creature has the same proficiency as you
and the bonus Iisted in its statistics is higher than yours,
use the creature's bonus in place ofyours. Voucan't use
any legendary actions or lair actions of the new formo
Vouassume the hit points and Hit Dice ofthe new
formoWhen you revert to your normal form, you
return to the number of hit points you had before you
transformed. ]fyou revert as a result of dropping to
Ohit points, any excess damage carries over to your
normal formoAs long as the excess damage doesn't
reduce your normal form to Ohit points, you aren't
knocked unconscious.
Vou retain the benefit of any features from your c1ass,
race, or other source and can use them, provided that
your new form is physically capable of doing so. Vou
can't use any special senses you have (for example,
darkvision) unless your new form also has that sense.
Vou can only speak if the creature can normally speak.
When you transform, you choose whether your
equipment falls to the ground, merges into the new
form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as
normal. The DM determines whether it is practical for
the new form to wear a piece of equipment, based on
the creature's shape and size. Vour equipment doesn't
change shape or size to match the new form, and any
equipment that the new form can't wear must either fali
to the ground or merge into your new formo Equipment
that merges has no effect in that state.
During this spell's duration, you can use your action to
assume a different form following the same restrictions
and rules for the original form, with one exception; if
your new form has more hit points than your current
one, your hit points remain at their current value.
SHATTER
2nd.level evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(a chip of mica)
Duration: Instantaneous
Asudden loud ringing noise, painfully intense, erupts
from a point ofyour choice within range. Each creature
in a lO-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must
make a Constitution saving throw. Acreature takes
3d8 thunder damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one. Acreature made of
inorganic material such as stone, crystal, or metal has
disadvantage on this saving throw.
A nonmagical object that isn't being worn or carried
also takes the damage if it's in the spcll's arca.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each slot levei above 2nd.SHIELD
1st-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when you are
hit by an attack or targeted by the magic missile spell
Range: SeIf
Components: V,S
Duration: 1 round
An invisible barrier of magical force appears and
protects YOU.Until the start ofyour next turn, you have a
+5 bonus to AC, including against the triggering attack,
and you take no damage from magic missile.
SHIELD OF FAITH
1st-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(a small parchment with a bit of
holy text writlen on it)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Ashimmering field appears and surrounds a creature
ofyour choice within range, granting it a +2 bonus to AC
for the duration.
SHILLELAGH
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(mistletoe, a shamrock leaf, and a
c1ubor quarterstaff)
Duration: 1 minute
The wood of a c1ubor quarterstaff you are holding is
imbued with nature's power. For the duration, you can
use your spellcasting ability instead of Strength for
the atlack and damage rolls of melee attacks using
that weapon, and the weapon's damage die becomes
a d8. The weapon also becomes magical, if it isn't
already. The spell ends ifyou cast it again or ifyou let go
of the weapon.
SHOCKING GRASP
Evocat/on cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Lightning springs from your hand to deliver a shock to
a creature you try to touch. Make a melee spell atlack
against the target. Vouhave advantage on the attack roll
if the target is wearing armor made of metal. On a hit,
the target takes ld8lightning damage, and it can't take
reactions until the start of its next turno
The spell's damage incrcases hy ld8 when you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
SILENCE
2nd-leveI iIlusion (ritl1al)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
PART 3 SPEI LS
For the duration, no sound can be created within or
pass through a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a
point you choose within range. Any creature or object
entirely inside the sphere is immune to thunder damage,
and creatures are deafened while entirely inside it.
Casting a spell that includes a verbal component is
impossible there.
SILENT IMAGE
1st-/evel iJlusion
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(abit offleece)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Voucreate the image ofan object, a creature, or some
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 15-foot
cube. The image appears at a spot within range and
lasts for the duration. The image is purely visual; it isn't
accompanied bysound, smell, or other sensory effects.
Voucan use your action to cause the image to move to
any spot within range. As the image changes location,
you can alter its appearance so that its movements
appear natural for the image. For example, ifyou create
an image ofa creature and move it,you can alter the
image so that itappears to be walking.
Physical interaction with the image reveals itto be an
illusion, because things can pass through it.Acreature
that uses its action to examine the image can determine
that itis an illusion with a successful Intelligence
(Investigation) check against your spell save DC. Ifa
creature disceros the illusion for what it is, the creature
can see through the image.
SIMULACRUM
7th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 12hours
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(snow or ice in quantities
sufficient to made a life-size copy ofthe duplicated
creature; some hair, fingeroail clippings, or other
piece ofthat creature's body placed inside the snow
or ice; and powdered ruby worth 1,500 gp, sprinkled
over the duplicate and consumed bythe spell)
Duration: Until dispelled
Voushape an illusory duplica te ofone beast or
humanoid that is within range for the entire casting
time of the spell. The duplicate is a creature, partially
real and formed from ice or snow, and itcan take
actions and otherwise be affected as a normal creature.
Itappears to be the same as the original, but ithas half
the creature's hit point maximum and is formed without
any equipment. Otherwise, the illusion uses ali the
statistics ofthe creature itduplicates.
The simulacrum is friendly to you and creatures you
designa te. Itobeys your spoken commands, moving
and acting in accordance with your wishes and acting
on your turo in combat. The simulacrum lacks the
ability to learo or become more powerful, so itnever
increases its levei or other abilities, nor can it regain
expended spell slots.
PART 3 ISPELLSIfthe simulacrum is damaged, you can repair it in an
alchemicallaboratory, using rare herbs and minerais
worth 100 gp per hit poim it regains. The simulacrum
lasts until itdrops to Ohit points, at which point it
reverts to snow and melts instantly.
Ifyou cast this spell again, any currently
active duplicates you created with this spell are
instantly destrayed.
SLEEP
1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S, M(a pinch offine sand, rose petals,
or a cricket)
Duration: 1minute
This spell sends creatures into a magical slumber.
RolI 5d8; the total is how many hit points ofcreatures
this spell can affect. Creatures within 20 feet of
a point you choose within range are affected in
ascending order oftheir currem hit points (ignoring
unconscious creatures).
Starting with the creature that has the lowest current
hit points, each creature affected bythis spell falls
unconscious until the spell ends, the sleeper takes
damage, or someone uses an action to shake or slap the
sleeper awake. Subtract each creature's hit points fram
the total before moving on to the creature with the next
lowest hit points. Acreature's hit points must be equal
to or less than the remaining total for that creature
to be affected.
Undead and creatures immune to being charmed
aren't affected bythis spell.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of2nd levei or higher, roll an additional 2d8 for
each slot levei above 1st.
SLEET STORM
3rd-/evel conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V,S, M(a pinch ofdust and a few
drops ofwater)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Until the spell ends, freezing rain and sleet fali in a
20-foot-tall cylinder with a 40-foot radius centered on
a point you choose within range. The area is heavily
obscured, and exposed flames in the area are doused.
The ground in the area is covered with slick ice,
making itdifficult terrain. When a creature enters the
spell's area for the first time on aturo or starts its turo
there, itmust make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed
save, itfalls prone.
Ifa creature is concentrating in the spell's area, the
creature must make a successful Constitution saving
throw against your spell save DC or lose concentration.
SLOW
3rd-Ievel transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(a drop ofmolasses)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Voualter time around up to six creatures ofyour
choice in a 40-foot cube within range, Each target must
succeed on a Wisdom saving throw ar be affected by
this spell for the duration.
An affected target's speed is halved, ittakes a -2
penalty to ACand Dexterity saving throws, and itcan't
use reactions. On its turn, itcan use elther an action ar
a bonus action, not both. Regardless ofthe creature's
abilities ar magic items, itcan't make more than one
melee ar ranged attack during its turno
Ifthe creature attempts to cast a spell with a casting
time of 1action, roll a d20. On an 11ar higher, the spell
doesn't take effect until the creature's next turn, and the
creature must use its action on that turn to complete the
spell. Ifitcan't, the spell is wasted.
Acreature affected bythis spell makes another
Wisdom savlng throw at the end ofits turno On a
successful save, the effect ends for lI.
SPARE THE DYING
Necromancy cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou touch a living creature that has Ohit points. The
creature becomes stable. This spell has no effect on
undead ar constructs.
SPEAK WITH ANIMALS
1st-leveI divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I action
Range: Seif
Components: V,S
Duration: 10minutes
Vougain the ability to comprehend and verbally
communicate with beasts for the duration. The
knowledge and awareness ofmany beasts is limited
by their intelligence, but at minimum, beasts can
give you information about nearby locations and
monsters, inc1uding whatever they can perceive ar have
perceived within the past day.Voumlght be able to
persuade a beast to perform a small favor foryou, at the
DM's discretion.
SPEAK WITH DEAD
3rd-Ievel necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: 10 feet
Components: V,S, M(burning incense)
Duration: 10minutes
Vougrant the semblance oflife and intelligence to a
corpse ofyour choice within range, allowing Itto answer
the questions you pose. The corpse must still have amouth and can't be undead. The spell fails ifthe corpse
was the target ofthis spell within the last 10days.
Until the spell ends, you can ask the corpse up to five
questions. The corpse knows only what itknew in life,
inc1uding the languages itknew. Answers are usually
brief, cryptic, ar repetitive, and the corpse is under no
compulsion to offer a truthful answer ifyou are hostile
to itor itrecognizes you as an enemy. This spell doesn't
return the creature's soul to its body, only its animating
spiril. Thus, the corpse can't learn new Information,
doesn't comprehend anything that has happened since it
died, and can't speculate about future events.
SPEAK WITH PLANTS
3rd-Ievel transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Seif(30-foot radius)
Components: V,S
Duration: 10minutes
Vouimbue plants within 30 feet ofyou with limited
sentience and animation, giving them the ability
to communicate with you and followyour simple
commands. Voucan question plants about events in the
spell's area within the past day, gaining information
about crealures that have passed, weather, and other
circumstances.
Voucan also turn difficult terrain caused byplant
growth (such as thickets and undergrowth) into ordinary
terrain that lasls for the duratlon. Or you can turn
ordinary terrain where plants are present into difficult
terrain that lasts for the duration, causing vines and
branches to hindcr pursuers, for example.
Plants might be able to perform other tasks on your
behalf, at the DM's discretion. The spell doesn't enable
plants to uproot themselves and move about, but they
can freely move branches, tendrils, and stalks.
lf a plant creature is in the area, you can communicate
with itas ifyou shared a common language, but you
gain no magical ability to influence it.
This spell can cause the plants created bythe entangle
spell to release a restrained creature.
SPIDER CUMB
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(adrop of bitumen and a spider)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch
gains the ability to move up, down, and across vertical
surfaces and upside down along ceilings, while leaving
its hands free. The target also gains a c1imbing speed
equal to its walking speed.
SPIKE GROWTH
2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: ISOfeet
Components: V,S, M(seven sharp thorns ar seven
small twigs, each sharpened to a point)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
PART 3 ISPELLS277
The ground in a 20-foot radius centered on a point
within range twists and sprouts hard spikes and thorns.
The area becomes difficult terrain for the duration.
When a creature moves into or within the area, ittakes
2d4 piercing damage forevery 5feet ittravels.
The transformation ofthe ground iscamoufiaged to
look natura!. Any creature that can't see the area at the
time the spell is cast must make a Wisdom (Perception)
check against your spell save DC to recognize the
terrain as hazardous before entering it.
SPIRIT GUARDIANS
3rd-/evel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeIf(15-foot radius)
Components: V,S, M(aholysymbol)
Duration: Concentration, up to lOminutes
Voucall forth spirits toprotect you. They fiitaround you
toa distance of 15feet for the duration. Ifyou are good
or neutra!. their spectral form appears angelic or fey
(your choice). Ifyou are evil, they appear fiendish.
When you cast this spell, you can designate any
number ofcreatures you can see to be unaffected byit.
An affected creature's speed is halved in the area, and
when the creature enters the area forthe first time on
a turn or starts its turn there, itmust make a Wisdom
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d8
radiant damage (ifyou are good or neutral) or 3d8
necrotic damage (ifyou are evil). On a successful save,
the creature takes half as much damage.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of4th leveIor higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for each slot leveIabove 3rd.
SPIRITUAL WEAPON
2nd-levei evacatian
Casting Time: I bonus actian
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: I minute
Youcreate a fioating, spectral weapon within range that
lasts for the duration or until you cast this spell again.
When you cast the spell, you can make a melee spell
attack against a creature within 5 feet ofthe weapon. On
a hit, the target takes force damage equal to Id8 +your
spellcasting ability modifier.
As a bonus action onyour turn, you can move the
weapon up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a
creature within 5 feet ofit.
The weapon can take whatever form yau choose.
Clerics ofdeities who are associated with a particular
weapon (as SI. Cuthbert is known forhis mace
and Thor forhis hammer) make this spell's effect
resemble that weapon.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of3rd leveIor higher, the damage increases by
Id8 forevery twaslot leveIs above the 2nd.
PART 3ISI'ELLSSTAGGERING SMITE
4th-levei evacatian
Casting Time: 1banus actian
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Canccntration, up to I minute
The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon
attack during this spell's duration, your weapon pierces
both body and mind, and the attack deals an extra
4d6 psychic damage to the target. The target must
make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, ithas
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks, and
can't take reactions, until the end ofits next turno
STINKING CLOUD
3rd-/evel conjuratiaIl
Casting Time: I action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S, M(a rotten egg or several skunk
cabbage leaves)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Voucreate a 20-foot-radius sphere ofyellow, nauseating
gas centered on a point within range. The c10udspreads
around corners, and its area is hcavily obscured. The
cloud lingers in the air forthe duratioll.
Each creature that iscompletely within the c1audat
the start afits turn must make a Canstitutian saving
throw against paisano On a failed save, the creature
spends its actian that turn retching and reeling.
Creatures that dan'tneedtobreathearare immune to
paison automatically succeed on this saving throw.
Amaderate wind (at least 10miles per hour) disperses
the c10udafter 4 rounds. Astrong wind (at Jeast 20
miles per haur) disperses itafter I round.
STONE SHAPE
4th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(50ftc1ay,which must be worked
into roughly the desired shape ofthe stone object)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voutouch a stone object ofMedium size or smaller or
a section ofstone no more than 5feet in any dimension
and form itinto any shape that suits your purpose. So,
for example, you could shape a large rock into a weapon,
idol, or coffer, or make a small passage through awall,
as long as the wall is less than 5 feet thick. Voucould
also shape a stone door or its frame to seal the door
shut. The object you create can have up to two hinges
and a latch, but finer mechallical detail isn't possible.
STONESKIN
4th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(diamond dust worth 100 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: COllcentration, up to I hour
This spell turns the flesh ofa willing creature you touch
as hard as stone. Until the spell ends, the target has
resistance to nonmagical bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing damage.
STORM OFVENGEANCE
9th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Sight
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Achurning storm cloud forms, centered on a point you
can see and spreading to a radius of360 fee!. Lightning
flashes in the area, thunder booms, and strong winds
roar. Each creature under the cloud (no more than 5,000
feet beneath the cloud) when itappears must make a
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature
takes 2d6 thunder damage and becomes deafened
for 5 minutes.
Each round you maintain concentration on this spell,
the storm produces additional effects on your turno
Round2. Acidic rain falls from the cloud.
Each creature and object under the cloud takes
ld6 acid damage.
Round3.Voucall six bolts oflightning from the
cloud to strike six creatures or objects ofyour choice
beneath the cloud. Agiven creature or object can't be
struck bymore than one boi!. Astruck creature must
make a Dexterity saving throw. The creature takes
lOd6lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
Round4. Hailstones rain down from the
cloud. Each creature under the cloud takes 2d6
bludgeoning damage.
Round 5-10. Gusts and freezing rain assail the
area under the cloud. The area becomes difficult
terrain and is heavily obscured. Each creature there
takes ld6 cold damage. Ranged weapon attacks in
the area are impossible. The wind and rain count as
a severe distraction for the purposes ofmaintaining
concentration on spells. Finally, gusts ofstrong wind
(ranging from 20 to 50 miles per hour) automatically
disperse fog,mists, and similar phenomena in the area,
whether mundane or magical.
SUGGESTlON
2nd-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,M(asnake's tongue and either a bit of
honeycomb or a drop ofsweet oil)
Duration: Concentration, up to8 hours
Vousuggest a course ofactivity (limited toa sentence
or two) and magically influence a creature you can
see within range that can hear and understand YOU.
Creatures that can't be charmed are immune to this
effec!. The suggestion must be worded in such a manner
as to make the course ofaction sound reasonable.
Asking the creature to stab itself, throw itself onto
a spear, immolate itself, or do some other obviously
harmful act ends the spell.The target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
failed save, it pursues the course ofaction you described
to the best ofits ability. The suggested course ofaction
can continue forthe entire duration. Irthe suggested
activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell
ends when the subject tinishes what itwas asked to do.
Voucan also specify conditions lhat will trigger a
special activity during the duration. For example, you
might suggest that a knight give her warhorse to the
tirst beggar she meets. Irthe condition isn't met before
the spell expires, the activity isn't performed.
Iryou or any ofyour companions damage the target,
the spell ends.
SUNBEAM
6th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Self (60-foot line)
Components: V,S, M(amagnifying glass)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Abeam ofbrilliant light flashes out from your hand
in a 5-foot-wide, 60-foot-long line. Each creature in
the line must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, a creature takes 6d8 radiant damage and
is blinded until your next turno On a successful save,
ittakes half as much damage and isn't blinded bythis
spell. Undead and oozes have disadvantage on this
saving throw.
Voucan create a new line ofradiance as your action
on any turn until the spell ends.
For the duration, a mote ofbrilliant radiance shines in
your hand. Itsheds bright light ina 30-foot radius and
dim light foran additional 30 fee!. This lighl issunligh!.
SUNBURST
8th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V,S, M(tire and a piece ofsunstone)
Duration: Instantaneous
Brilliant sunlight flashes in a 60-foot radius centered
on a point you choose within range. Each creature in
that light must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, a creature takes 12d6 radiant damage and is
blinded for 1minute. On a successful save, it takes half
as much damage and isn't blinded bythis spell. Undead
and oozes have disadvantage on this saving throw.
Acreature blinded bythis spell makes another
Constitution saving throw at the end ofeach ofits turns.
On a successful save, it is no longer blinded.
This spell dispels any darkness in its area that was
created bya spell.
SWIFT QurVER
5th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1bonus action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(aquiver containing at least one
piece ofammunition)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
PART 3ISPELLS279
280--Voutransmute your quiver so itproduces an endless
supply ofnonmagical ammunition, which seems toleap
intoyour hand when you reach forit.
On each ofyour turns until the spell ends, you can use
abonus action tomake two attacks with aweapon that
uses ammunition from the quiver. Each time you make
such aranged attack, your quiver magically replaces
the piece ofammunition you used with asimilar piece
ofnonmagical ammunition. Anypieces ofammunition
created bythis spell disintegrate when the spell ends. ]f
the quiver leaves your possession, the spell ends.
SYMBOL
7th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1minute
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(mercury, phosphorus, and
powdered diamond and opaIwith atotal value ofat
least 1,000 gp,which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled or triggered
When you cast this spell, you inscribe aharmful glyph
either on asurface (such as asection offloor,awall, or
atable) orwithin an object that can bec10sedtoconceal
the glyph (such as abook, ascroll, oratreasure chest).
]fyou choose asurface, the glyph can cover an area of
the surface no larger than 10feet indiameter. Ifyou
choose an object, that object must remain initsplace; if
the object ismoved more than 10feet from where you
cast this spell, the glyph isbroken, and the spell ends
without being triggered.
The glyph isnearly invisible, requiring an Intelligence
(lnvestigation) check against your spell save
DCtofindit.
Voudecide what triggers the glyph when you cast the
spell. For glyphs inscribed on asurface, the most typical
triggers include touching or stepping on the glyph,
removing another object covering it,approaching within
acertain distance ofit,or manipulating the object
that holds it.For glyphs inscribed within an object,
the most common triggers are opening the object,
approaching within acertain distance ofit,or seeing or
reading the glyph.
Voucan further refine the trigger so the spell is
activated onlyunder certain circumstances or according
toacreature's physical characteristics (such as height
or weight), or physical kind (forexample, the ward could
beset toaffect hags orshapechangers). Voucan also
specify creatures that don't trigger the glyph, such as
those who say acertain password.
When you inscribe the glyph, choose one ofthe
options below foritseffect. Once triggered, the glyph
glows, fillinga60-foot-radius sphere with dim Iight
for 10minutes, after which time the spell ends. Each
creature inthe sphere when the glyph activates is
targcted byitseffect, as isacreature that enters the
sphere forthe first time on aturn or ends itsturn there.
Death.Each target must make aConstitution saving
throw, taking IOdlOnecrotic damage on afailed save, or
half as much damage on asuccessful save.
Discord.Each target must make aConstitution saving
throw. Onafailed save, atarget bickers and argues
with other creatures for 1minute. During this time,
PART 3 ISPELLSitisincapable ofmeaningful communication and has
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
Fear.Each target must make aWisdom saving throw
and becomes frightened for 1minute on afailed save.
While frightened, the target drops whatever itisholding
and must move at least 30 feet away from the glyph on
each ofits turns, ifable.
Hope/essness. Each target must make aCharisma
saving throw. Onafailed save, the target is
overwhelmed with despair for 1minute. During this
time, itcan't attack or target any creature with harmful
abilities, spells, or other magical effects.
Insanity.Each target must make an lntelligence saving
throw. Onafailedsave, the target isdriven insane for
1minute. An insane creature can't take actions, can't
understand what other creatures say,can't read, and
speaks onlyingibberish. The DMcontrais its movement,
which iserratic.
Pain.Each target must make aConstitution saving
throw and becomes incapacitated with excruciating pain
for 1minute on afailed save.
S/eep.Each target must make aWisdom saving throw
and falls unconscious for 10minutes onafailed save. A
creature awakens ifittakes damage or ifsomeone uses
an action toshake or slap itawake.
Stunning.Each target must make aWisdom saving
throw and becomes stunned for 1minute onafailedsave.
TASHA'S HIDEOUS LAUGHTER
1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(tinytarts and afeather that is
waved inthe air)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1minute
Acreature ofyour choice that you can see within range
perceives everything as hilariously funny and falls
into fitsoflaughter ifthis spell affects it.The target
must succeed on aWisdom saving throw or faliprone,
becoming incapacitated and unable tostand up forthe
duration. Acreature with an lntelligence score of4or
less isn't affected.
Atthe end ofeach ofits turns, and each time ittakes
damage, the target can make another Wisdom saving
throw. The target has advantage on the saving throw if
it's triggered bydamage. On asuccess, the spell ends.
TELEKINESIS
5th.level trallsmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Vougain the ability tomove or manipulate creatures
or objects bythought. When you cast the spell, and as
your action each round forthe duration, you can exert
your will on one creature or object that you can see
within range, causing the appropriate effect below. Vou
can affect the same target round after round, or choose
anew one atany time. ]fyouswitch targets, the prior
target isno longer affected bythe spell.
you. Vourfamiliarily with the destinalion determines
whelher you arrive lhere successfully. The DMrolls
dlOOand consults the table.
Familiarity. "Permanent circle" means apermanent
teleportation circle whose sigil sequence you know.
"Associaled object" means that you possess an objecl
taken from the desired destination within the last six
months, such as abook from awizard's Iibrary, bed
linen from aroyal suite, or achunk ofmarble from a
lich's secret tombo
"Veryfamiliar" isaplace you have been very often, a
place you have carefully studied, or aplace you can see
when you cast the spell. "Seen casually" issomeplace
you have seen more than once bul wilh which you aren't
very familiar. "Viewed once" isaplace you have seen
once, possibly using magic. "Description" isaplace
whose Iocation and appearance you know through
someone else's description, perhaps from amap.
"False destination" isaplace that doesn't exist.
Perhaps you tried toscry an enemy's sanctum but
instead viewed an illusion, oryou are atlempting lo
teleport toafamiliar localion that nolonger exists.
00Target.Vouand your group (orthe target objecl)
appear where you wanllo.
OffTarget.Vouand your group (orthe larget object)
appear arandom dislance away from the deslination
inarandom direclion. Distance offtarget is Id10x
IdlOpercent ofthe distance that was tobe traveled.
For example, ifyou tried totraveI 120 miles, landed off
largel, and rolled a5and 3on the two dlOs, lhen you
would be offlargel by15percent, or 18miles. The DM
determines lhe direction offtargel randomly byrolling a
d8 and designaling I as north, 2as northeast, 3as easl,
and so on around lhe points oflhe compasso ]fyou were
teleporting loacoastal cityand wound up 18miles out
atsea, youcould be introuble.
Similar Area. Vouand your group (orthe targel
object) wind up inadifferent area that's visually or
themalically similar tothe target area. ]fyou are
heading foryour home laboratory, forexample, you
might wind up inanother wizard's laboratory or in
an alchemical supply shop that has many ofthe same
tools and implemenls as your laboratory. Generally,
you appear inthe closest similar place, bul since the
spell has norange Iimit,you could conceivably wind up
anywhere on the plane.
Mishap.The spell's unpredictable magic results ina
difficultjourney. Each leleporting crealure (orthe largel
objecl) lakes 3d10force damage, and lhe DMrerolls onCreature.Voucan lry tomove aHuge or smaller
crealure. Make an abilily check wilh your spellcasting
ability contested bythe crealure's Strength check. ]f
you win lhe contesl, you move the creature upto30 feet
inanydireclion, including upward but not beyond the
range oflhis spel!. Until the end ofyour nexllurn, the
creature isrestrained inyour telekinetic gripoAcreature
Iifled upward issuspended inmid.air.
Onsubsequenl rounds, you can use your action lO
atlempl tomaintain your telekinetic grip on the creature
byrepealing lhe contest.
Object.Voucan try tomove an objecl thal weighs
up to 1,000 pounds.lfthe object isn't being worn or
carried, you automalically move iluplo30 feetinany
direction, but not beyond lhe range oflhis spell.
Ifthe object isworn or carried byacreature, you must
make an ability check wilh your spellcasting ability
contesled bylhat creature's Strenglh check. ]fyou
succeed, you pull the object away from that creature and
can move ilup to30 feel inanydireclion but nol beyond
the range ofthis spel!.
Voucan exert fineconlrol on objecls with your
telekinetic grip, such as manipulaling asimple tool,
opening adoor or aconlainer, stowing or relrieving
an item from an open container, or pouring the
contents from avia!'
TELEPATHY
8th./evel evocation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Unlimited
Components: V,S, M(apair ofIinked silver rings)
Duration: 24 hours
Voucreate atelepathic link between yourself and
awilling crealure with which you are familiar. The
creature can be anywhere on the same plane of
exislence as you. The spell ends ifyou or the largel are
no longer on the same plane.
Until the spell ends, you and the target can
inslantaneously share words, images, sounds, and
other sensory messages with one another through the
Iink,and lhe target recognizes you as the creature it
iscommunicating with. The spell enables acreature
wilh an Intelligence score ofatleast I tounderstand
lhe meaning ofyour words and lake inlhe scope ofany
sensory messages you send lo11.
TELEPORT
7th./evel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 10feel
Components: V
Duration: Inslantaneous
This spell instantly transports you and up toeight
willing creatures ofyour choice that you can see within
range, orasingle object that you can see within range,
toadestination you select. Ifyou target an object, il
must be able tofitenlirely inside a lO.fool cube, and il
can't be held or carried byan unwilling crealure.
The destination you choose must be known toyou,
and ilmusl beon the same plane ofexislence asFamiliarily
Permanent circle
Associaled objecl
Very familiar
Seen casually
Viewed once
Descriplion
False destinalionMishap
01-05
01-33
01-43
01-43
01-50Similar
Area
06-13
34-43
44-53
44-53
51-100Off
Targel
14-24
44-53
54-73
54-73On
Targel
01-100
01-100
25-100
54-100
74-100
74-100
PART 3 PELLS
281
the table to see where you wind up (multiple mishaps
can occur, dealing damage each time).
TELEPORTATION CIRCLE
5th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 10 feet
Components: V,M (rare chalks and inks infused with
precious gems with 50 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: 1 round
As you cast the spell, you draw a lO-foot-diameter
circle on the ground inscribed with sigils that Iink
your location to a permanent teleportation circle of
your choice whose sigil sequence you know and that is
on the same plane of existence as you. A shimmering
portal opens within the circle you drew and remains
open until the end of your next turn. Any creature that
enters the portal instantly appears within 5 feet of the
destination circle or in the nearest unoccupied space if
that space is occupied.
Many major tempIes, guilds, and other important
places have permanent teleportation circles inscribed
somewhere within their confines. Each such circle
includes a unique sigil sequence-a string of magical
runes arranged in a particular pattern. When you first
gain the ability to cast this spell, you learn the sigil
sequences for two destinations on the Material Plane,
determined by the DM. Vou can learn additional sigil
sequences during your adventures. Voucan commit
a new sigil sequence to memory after studying it
for 1 minute.
Vou can create a permanent teleportation circle by
casting this spell in the same location every day for one
year. Vou need not use the circle to teleport when you
cast the spell in this way.
TENSER'S FLOATING DISK
1st-leveI conjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (a drop of mercury)
Duration: 1 hour
This spell creates a circular, horizontal plane of force,
3 feet in dia meter and 1 inch thick, that lIoats 3 feet
above the ground in an unoccupied space of your choice
that you can see within range. The disk remains for the
duration, and can hold up to 500 pounds. If more weight
is placed on it, the spell ends, and everything on the disk
falls to the ground.
The disk is immobile while you are within 20 feet of
it. If you move more than 20 feet away from it, the disk
follows you so that it remains within 20 feet of YOU. It
can move across uneven terrain, up or down stairs,
slopes and the Iike. but it can't cross an e1evation change
of 10 feet or more. For example, the disk can't move
across a IO-foot-deep pit, nor could it leave such a pit if it
was created at the bottom.
Ifyou move more than 100 feet from the disk (typically
because it can't move around an obstacle to follow you),
the spell ends.
PART 3 ISrELLSTHAUMATURGY
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: Up to 1 minute
Vou manifest a minor wonder, a sign of supernatural
power, within range. Voucreate one of the following
magical effects within range:
Vour voice booms up to three times as loud as normal
for 1 minute.
Vou cause liames to lIicker, brighten, dim, or change
color for 1 minute.
Voucause harmless tremors in the ground for 1
minute.
Vou create an instantaneous sound that originates
from a point of your choice within range, such as a
rumble of thunder, the cry of a raven, or ominous
whispers.
Vou instantaneously cause an unlocked door or win-
dow to lIyopen or slam shut.
Vou alter the appearance of your eyes for 1 minute.
Ifyou cast this spell multipIe times, you can have up to
three of its l-minute effects active at a time, and you can
dismiss such an effect as an action.
THORNWHIP
Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (the stem of a plant with thorns)
Duration: 1nstantaneous
Voucreate a long, vine-Iike whip covered in thorns that
lashes out at your command toward a creature in range.
Make a melee spell attack against the target. ]f the
attack hits, the creature takes 1d6 piercing damage, and
if the creature is Large or smaller, you pull the creature
up to 10 feet c10ser to you.
This spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach
5th leveI (2d6), 11th levei (3d6), and 17th leveI (4d6).
THUNDEROUS SMITE
1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
The first time you hit with a melee weapon attack
during this spell's duration, your weapon rings with
thunder that is audible within 300 feet of you, and the
attack deals an extra 2d6 thunder damage to the target.
Additionally, if the target is a creature, it must succeed
on a Strength saving throw or be pushed 10 feet away
from you and knocked prone.
THUNDERWAVE
1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (15-foot cube)
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Awave ofthunderous foree sweeps out from you. Eaeh
ereature ina 15-footeube originating from you must
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a
ereature takes 2d8 thunder damage and ispushed 10
feet away from you. On asueeessful save, the ereature
takes half as mueh damage and isn't pushed.
In addition, unseeured objeets that are eompletely
within the area ofeffeet are automatically pushed 10feet
away from you bythe spell's effeet, and the spell emits a
thunderous boom audible out to300 feet.
At Higher LeveIs. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of2nd leveIor higher, the damage inereases by
ld8 foreaeh slot leveIabove 1st.
TIME STOP
9th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1aetion
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Voubriefly stop the flowoftime for everyone but
yourself. No time passes forother ereatures, while you
take Id4+1turns inarow, during which you ean use
aetions and move as normal.
This spell ends ifone ofthe aetions you use during
this period, or any effeets that you ereate during this
period, affeets aereature other than you or an objeet
being worn or earried bysomeone other than you. In
addition, the spell ends ifyou move toaplaee more than
1,000 feet from the loeation where you east it.
TONGUES
3rd-/evel divination
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Toueh
Components: V,M(asmall day model ofaziggurat)
Duration: 1hour
This spell grants the ereature you toueh the ability to
understand any spoken language ithears. Moreover,
when the target speaks, any ereature that knows at
least one language and ean hear the target understands
what itsays.
TRANSPORT VIA PLANTS
6th-levei eonjuration
Casting Time: 1aetion
Range: 10feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1round
This spell ereates a magieallink between a Large or
larger inanimate plant within range and another plant,
at any distanee, on the same plane ofexistence. Vou
must have seen or touched the destination plant at least
onee before. For the duration, any creature can step into
the target plant and exit from the destination plant by
using 5feet ofmovement.TREE STRIDE
5th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range:Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Coneentration, upto 1minute
Vougain the ability toenter atree and move from inside
ittoinside another tree ofthe same kind within 500
feet. Both trees must be living and at least the same size
as you. Voumust use 5feet ofmovement to enter atree.
Vouinstantly know the location ofali other trees ofthe
same kind within 500 feet and, as part ofthe move used
toenter the tree, ean either pass into one ofthose trees
or step out ofthe tree you're in.Vouappear inaspot of
your choice within 5feet ofthe destination tree, using
another 5feet ofmovement. Ifyou have no movement
left,you appear within 5feet ofthe tree you entered.
Voucan use this transportation ability once per round
for the duration. Voumust end each turn outside atree.
TRUE POLYMORPH
9th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(adrop ofmereury, adolIop of
gum arabic, and awisp ofsmoke)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1hour
Choose one ereature or nonmagical objeet that you
can see within range. Voutransform the creature into
adifferent creature, the ereature into an object, or the
objeet into a creature (the object must be neither worn
nor earried byanother creature). The transformation
lasts for the duration, or until the target drops to Ohit
points or dies. Ifyou concentrate on this spelI forthe fulI
duration, the transformation beeomes permanent.
Shapechangers aren't affected bythis spell. An
unwilIing creature ean make aWisdom saving throw,
and ifitsueeeeds, itisn't affected bythis spell.
Creature into Creature. Ifyou turn a creature into
another kind ofcreature, the new form can be any kind
you choose whose ehalIenge rating isequal toor less
than the target's (orits leveI.ifthe target doesn't have a
chalIenge rating). The target's game statistics, induding
mental ability scores, are replaced bythe statisties of
the new formoItretains its alignment and personality.
The target assumes the hit points ofits new form,
and when itreverts toits normal form, the creature
returns tothe number ofhit points ithad before it
transformed. Ifitreverts as aresult ofdropping to
Ohit points, any excess damage carries over toits
normal formoAs long as the excess damage doesn't
reduce the creature's normal form to Ohit points, itisn't
knocked unconscious.
The creature islimited inthe actions itcan perform by
the nature ofits new form, and itcan't speak, east spelIs,
or take any other action that requires hands or speech,
unless its new form iscapable ofsuch actions.
The target's gear melds into the new formoThe
creature can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benelit
from any ofits equipment.
PART 3 SPELLS
Object into Creature. Voucan turn an object into
any kind ofcreature, as long as the creature's size
isno larger than the object's size and the creature's
cha11engerating is9orlower. The creature isfriendly to
you and your companions. Itacts on each ofyour turns.
Voudecide what action ittakes and how itmoves. The
DMhas the creature's statislics and resolves ali ofits
actions and movement.
[fthe spe11becomes permanent, you no longer control
the creature. Itmight remain friendly toyou, depending
on howyou have treated it.
Creature into Object. Ifyou turn acreature into an
object, ittransforms along with whatever itiswearing
and carrying into that formoThe creature's statistics
become those ofthe object, and the creature has no
rÍlemory oftime spent inthis form, after the spe11ends
and itreturns toits normal formo
TRUE RESURRECTION
9th.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1hour
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(asprinkle ofholywater and
diamonds worth at least 25,000 gp,which the
spe11consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Voutouch acreature that has been dead forno longer
than 200 years and that died forany reason except
oldage. Ifthe creature's souIisfree and wi11ing,the
creature isrestored tolifewith a11itshit points.
This spe11doses a11wounds, neutralizes any poison,
cures a11diseases, and lifts anycurses affecting the
crealure when itdied. The spell replaces damaged or
missing organs and limbs.
The spe11can even provideanew body ifthe original
no longer exists, inwhich case you must speak the
creature's name, The creature then appears inan
unoccupied space you choose within 10feet ofyou.
TRUE SEEING
6th.level divination
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(anointment forthe eyes that
costs 25 gp;ismade from mushroom powder, saffron,
and fat;and isconsumed bythe spe11)
Duration: 1hour
This spe11gives the willing creature you touch the ability
tosee things as they actually are. For the duration, the
creature has truesight, notices secret doors hidden by
magic, and can see into the Ethereal Plane, ali out toa
range of 120 feet.
TRUE STRIKE
Divination cantrip
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 30 feet
Components: S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1round
Vouextend your hand and point afinger atatarget in
range. Vourmagic grants you abrief insight into the
I'ART 3 ISI'ELLStarget's defenses. Onyour next turn, you gain advantage
onyour first attack roll against lhe target, provided that
this spe11hasn't ended.
TSUNAMI
8th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I minute
Range: Sight
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentralion, up to6rounds
Awall ofwater springs into existence atapoint you
choose within range, Voucan make the wall up to300
feel long, 300 feet high, and 50 feet thick. The walllasts
forthe duration.
When lhe wall appears, each creature within its area
must make aStrength saving throw. On afailed save,
acreature takes 6dlO bludgeoning damage, or half as
much damage on asuccessful save.
Atthe start ofeach ofyour turns after the wall
appears, the wa11,along with any creatures init,moves
50 feet away from YOU.AnyHuge or smaller creature
inside the wall or whose space the wall enters when
itmoves must succeed onaStrength saving throw or
take 5dlO bludgeoning damage. Acreature can take
this damage onlyonce per round. Atthe end ofthe turn,
the wall's height is reduced by50 feet,and the damage
creatures take from the spell on subsequent rounds is
reduced by IdlO. When the wa11reaches Ofeet inheight,
the spe11ends.
Acreature caught inthe wall can move byswimming.
Because ofthe force ofthe wave, though, the creature
must make asuccessful Strength (Athletics) check
against your spell save DCinorder tomove atalI.Ifit
fails the check, itcan't move, Acreature that moves out
ofthe area faIlstothe ground.
UNSEEN SERVANT
1st-leveiconjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M(apiece ofstring and
abitofwood)
Duration: 1hour
This speIl creates an invisible, mindless, shapeless
force that performs simple tasks atyour command until
the speIl ends. The servant springs into existence inan
unoccupied space on the ground within range. Ithas AC
10,I hit point, and aStrength of2,and itcan't attack. [f
itdrops toOhit points, the speIl ends.
Once on each ofyour turns as abonus action, youcan
mentaIly command the servant tomove up to 15feet and
interact with an object. The servant can perform simple
tasks that ahuman servant could do,such as felching
things, c1eaning, mending, folding c1othes, lighting
fires, serving food, and pouring wine. Once you givethe
command, the servant performs the task tothe best of
itsability until itcompletes the task, then waits foryour
next command.
Ifyou command the servant toperform atask that
would move itmore than 60 feet away from you,
the spe11ends.
VAMPIRIC TOUCH
3rd-Jevel necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The touch ofyour shadow-wreathed hand can siphon life
force from others toheal your wounds. Make amelee
spell attack against acreature wilhin your reach. On
ahit, the target takes 3d6 necrotic damage, and you
regain hit points equal tohalf the amount ofnecratic
damage dealt. Until the spell ends, you can make the
attack again on each ofyour turns as an action.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of4th leveiar higher, the damage increases by
Id6 foreach slot leveiabove 3rd.
VICIOUS MOCKERY
Enchantmentcantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouunleash astring ofinsults laced with subtle
enchantments atacreature youcan see within range. lf
the target can hear you (though itneed not understand
you),itmust succeed on aWisdom saving throw ar take
Id4 psychic damage and have disadvantage on the next
attack rall itmakes before the end ofits next turo.
This spell's damage increases by Id4 when you reach
5th levei(2d4), 11thlevei(3d4),and 17thlevei(4d4).
WALL OF FIRE
4th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(asmall piece ofphosphorus)
Duration: Concentration, upto I minute
Voucreate awall offireon asolid surface within
range. Voucan make the wall up to60 feet long, 20
feet high, and I footthick, ar aringed wall up to20 feet
indiameter, 20 feet high, and I footthick. The wall is
opaque and lasts forthe duration.
When the wall appears, each creature within itsarea
must make aDexterity saving throw. Onafailed save, a
creature takes 5d8 firedamage, ar half as much damage
on asuccessful save.
One side ofthe wall, selected byyou when you cast
this spell, deals 5d8 firedamage toeach creature lhat
ends itsturo within 10feet ofthat side ar inside the
wal!. Acreature takes the same damage when itenters
the wall forthe first time on aturo ar ends itsturo there.
The other side ofthe wall deals nodamage.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast lhis spell using a
spell slot of5th leveiar higher, the damage increases by
Id8 foreach slot leveiabove 4th.WALL OF FORCE
5th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(apinch ofpowder made by
crushing aclear gemstone)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Aninvisible wall offorce springs into existence at a
point you choose within range. The wall appears in
any orientation you choose, as ahorizontal ar vertical
barrier ar atan angle. Itcan be free floating ar resting
on asolid surface. Voucan form itinto ahemispherical
dome ar asphere with aradius ofup to 10feet, ar you
can shape aflatsurface made up often IO-foot-by-
IO-footpanels. Each panel must be contiguous with
another pane!. In anyform, the wall is 1/4inch thick.
1tlasts forthe duration. Ifthe wall cuts through a
creature's space when itappears, the creature ispushed
toone sideofthe wall (your choice which side).
Nothing can physically pass through the wal!. Itis
immune toali damage and can't be dispelled by dispel
magic.Adisintegrate spell destroys the wall instantly,
however. The wall also extends into the Ethereal Plane,
blocking ethereal travei through the wall.
WALL OF ICE
6th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M(asmall piece ofquartz)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10minutes
Voucreate awall oficeon asolid surface within range.
Voucan form itinto ahemispherical dome ar asphere
with aradius ofupto 10feet, aryou can shape aflat
surface made up often IO-foot-square panels. Each
panel must be contiguous with another pane!. Inany
form, the wall is I footthick and lasts forthe duration.
Ifthe wall cuts through acreature's space when it
appears, the creature within its area ispushed toone
sideofthe wall and must make aDexterity saving throw.
On afailed save, the creature takes IOd6cold damage,
ar half as much damage on asuccessful save.
The wall isan object that can bedamaged and thus
breached. 1thas AC12and 30 hit points per IO-foot
section, and itisvulnerable tofiredamage. Reducing
a 10-footsection ofwall toOhit points destrays itand
leaves behind asheet offrigid air inthe space the wall
occupied. Acreature moving thraugh the sheet offrigid
air forthe first time onaturo must make aConstitution
saving thraw. That creature takes 5d6 cold damage on a
failed save, ar half as much damage on asuccessful one.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of7th leveiar higher, the damage the wall
deals when itappears increases by2d6, and the damage
fram passing through the sheet offrigid air increases by
Id6, foreach slot leveiabove 6th.
PAR'I 3 I SPELLS
WALL OFSTONE
5th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 120feel
Components: V,S, M(asmall blockofgranile)
Duration: Concenlralion, uplO10minules
Anonmagical wallofsolid slone springs inloexislence
aIapoinlyouchoose wilhin range. The wa11is6inches
lhick and iscomposed oflen lO-foOl-by-lO-foOI panels.
Each panel musl beconliguous wilh alleasl one olher
pane!.AIlernatively.youcan creale 10-foOl-by-20-fool
panels lhat are only3inches lhick.
Iflhe wallculs lhrough acrealure's space when il
appears, lhe crealure ispushed loone side oflhe wa11
(yourchoice).lfacreature would besurrounded ona11
sides bylhe wa11(orlhe wa11and anolher solidsurface),
lhal crealure can make aDexlerity saving lhrow. Ona
success, ilcan use ilsreaclion lomoveuploilsspeed so
lhat ilisnolonger enclosed bylhe wall.
The wall can haveanyshape youdesire, lhough il
can'l occupylhe same space as acrealure orobjecl.
The walldoesn'l need lobeverlical orresl onanyfirm
foundalion. Itmusl. however, merge wilh and besolidly
supporled byexisling slone. Thus, youcan use lhis spell
lobridge achasm orcreale aramp.
Ifyou creale aspan grealer lhan 20feelinlenglh, you
musl halve lhe size ofeach panello creale supporls.
Voucan crudely shape lhe walllo creale crenellalions,
balllemenls, and soon.
The wall isan objecl madeofstone that can be
damaged and lhus breached. Each panel has AC15and
30hitpoints per inchofthickness. Reducing apanel
loOhitpoints destroys itand might cause connected
panels tocollapse aIthe DM'sdiscrelion.
lfyoumaintain your concentralion onthis spell for
itswholeduralion, the wallbecomes permanenl and
can't bedispelled. Olherwise, lhe walldisappears when
the spell ends.
WALL OFTHORNS
6th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: 120feel
Components: V,S,M(ahandful oflhorns)
Duration: Concenlralion, upto10minules
Voucreale awa11oflough, pliable.langled brush
brislling with needle-sharp lhorns. The wa11appears
within range onasolid surface and lasls forlhe
duralion. Vouchoose lOmake lhewall uplo60 feel
long, 10feelhigh, and 5feellhick oracircle lhal has
a20-fooldiameler and isuplo20feelhigh and 5feel
lhick. The wall blocks lineofsighl.
When lhe wall appears, each crealure wilhin ilsarea
musl make aDexlerily saving lhrow. Onafailedsave,
acrealure lakes 7d8piercing damage, or halfas much
damage onasuccessful save.
Acrealure can movelhrough lhe wall,albeil slowly
and painfully. Forevery 1foolacreature moves
lhrough lhe wa11,ilmusl spend 4feelofmovemenl.
Furlhermore, lhe firsllime acrealure enlers lhe wall
onalurn orends itslurn lhere, lhe crealure muslmake aDexlerily saving throw. Ittakes 7d8slashing
damage onafailedsave,orhalfas much damage ona
successful one.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When youcasllhis spe11using a
spe11slolof71hleveior higher, boIhlypes ofdamage
increase byId8 foreach slollevel above61h.
WARDING BOND
2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M(apair ofplalinum rings worlh aI
leasl 50gpeach, whichyouand lhe largel musl wear
forlhe duralion)
Duration: 1hour
This spellwards awilling crealure youlouch and
creales amyslic conneclion belween youand lhe largel
unlillhe spell ends. While lhe largel iswilhin 60feelof
you.ilgains a+1bonus loACand saving lhrows, and
ilhas resislance loalidamage. AIso,each lime illakes
damage, youlake lhe same amount ofdamage.
The spell ends ifyoudrop loOhilpoinls orifyou
and lhe largel become separaled bymore lhan 60 feel.
Italso ends iflhe spell iscasl again oneilher oflhe
connecled crealures. Voucan also dismiss lhe spell
as an aclion.
WATER BREATHING
3rd-Ievel transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 30feel
Components: V,S, M(ashorl reed or piece ofslraw)
Duration: 24hours
This spell granls uploten willing crealures youcan see
wilhin range lhe abililylobrealhe underwaler unlillhe
spell ends. Affecledcrealures also relain lheir normal
mode ofrespiralion.
WATERWALK
3rd-Ievel transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 30feel
Components: V,S, M(apiece ofcork)
Duration: 1hour
This spellgranls lhe abililylomoveacross anyIiquid
surface-such as waler,acid, mud,snow,quicksand,
orlava-as ifilwere harmless solid ground (crealures
crossing mollen lavacan slilllake damage from lhe
heal).Uplolen willing crealures youcan see wilhin
range gain lhis abililyforthe duralion.
lfyoulargel acrealure submerged inaIiquid,the
spell carries lhe largello lhe surface ofthe liquidaIa
rale of60feelper round.
WEB
2nd-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1aclion
Range: 60feel
Components: V,S, M(abilofspiderweb)
Duration: Concenlration, upto 1hour
PART.3 Pil
288Vouconjure amass ofthiek, stieky webbing atapoint of
your ehoice within range, The webs filla20-foot eube
from that point forthe duration, The webs are diffieult
terrain and lightly obseure their area.
Ifthe webs aren't anehored between two solid masses
(sueh as walls or trees) or layered aeross afloar,wall,
or eeiling, the eonjured web eollapses on itself, and the
spell ends at the start ofyour next turn. Webs layered
over aflatsurfaee have adepth of5feel.
Eaeh ereature that starts itsturn inthe webs or that
enters them during its turn must make aDexterity
saving throw. On afailed save, the ereature isrestrained
as long as itremains inthe webs oruntil itbreaks free.
Aereature restrained bythe webs ean use itsaetion to
make aStrength eheek against your spell save De. Ifit
sueeeeds, itisno longer restrained.
The webs are flammable. Any5-footeube ofwebs
exposed tofireburns away in 1round, dealing 2d4 fire
damage toany ereature that starts itsturn inthe /ire.
WEIRD
9th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 1aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Coneentration, up toone minute
Drawing on the deepest fears ofagroup ofereatures,
you ereate illusory ereatures intheir minds, visible
onlytothem. Eaeh ereature ina30-foot-radius
sphere eentered on apoint ofyour ehoice within
range must make aWisdom saving throw. On afailed
save, aereature beeomes frightened forthe duration.
The illusion ealls on the ereature's deepest fears,
manifesting itsworst nightmares as an implaeable
threal. Atthe start ofeaeh ofthe frightened ereature's
turns, itmust sueeeed on aWisdom saving throw or
take 4dlO psyehie damage. On asueeessful save, the
spell ends forthat ereature.
WIND WALK
6th-levei transmutation
CastingTime:I minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(/ire and holywater)
Duration: 8 hours
PART 3ISPELLSVouand up toten willing ereatures you ean see
within range assume agaseous form forthe duration,
appearing as wisps ofc1oud.While inthis c10udform,
aereature has aflyingspeed of300 feet and has
resistanee todamage from nonmagieal weapons. The
only aetions aereature ean take inthis form are the
Dash aetion or torevert toits normal formoReverting
takes I minute, during whieh time aereature is
ineapacitated and ean't move. Until the spell ends, a
ereature ean revert toc10udform, whieh also requires
the I-minute transformation.
Ifaereature isinc10udform and flyingwhen the effeet
ends, the ereature deseends 60 feet per round for 1
minute until itlands, which itdoes safely. Ifitean't land
after 1minute, the ereature falls the remaining distanee.
WINDWALL
3rd-/evel evocation
CastingTime:1action
Range: 120feet
Components: V,S, M(atinyfan and afeather of
exotic origin)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Awall ofstrong wind rises from the ground atapoint
you choose within range. Vouean make the wall up
to50 feet long, 15feet high, and 1footthick. Vouean
shape the wall inanywayyou ehoose so long as it
makes one continuous path along the ground. Thewall
lasts forthe duration.
When the wall appears, each creature within itsarea
must make aStrength saving throw. Aereature takes
3d8 bludgeoning damage on afailed save, or half as
much damage on asuccessful one.
The strong wind keeps fog,smoke, and other gases at
bay.Small orsmaller flyingereatures or objects can't
pass through the wall. Loose, Iightweight materiais
brought into the wall flyupward. Arrows, bolts, and
other ordinary projectiles launehed at targets behind
the wall are deflected upward and automatically miss.
(Boulders hurled bygiants or siege engines, and similar
projectiles, are unaffeeted.) Creatures ingaseous form
can't pass through il.
WISH
9th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I aelion
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Wishisthe mightiest spell amortal ereature can
easl. Bysimply speaking aloud, you can alter the very
foundations ofreality inaccord with your desires.
The basic use ofthis spell istoduplieate any other
spell of8th leveior lower. Voudon't need tomeet any
requirements inthat spell, including costly eomponents.
The spell simply takes effecl.
Alternatively, you ean ereate one ofthe following
effecls ofyour ehoice:
Vouereale one object ofupto25,000 gp invalue thal
isn't amagic item. The objeel ean beno more than
300 feet in any dimension, and it appears in an unoc-
cupied space you can see on the ground,
Vouallow up to twenty creatures that you can see to
regain ali hit points, and you end ali effects on them
described in the greater restoration spel!.
Vougrant up to ten creatures that you can see resis-
tance to a damage type you choose.
Vougrant up to ten creatures you can see immunity to
a single spell or other magical effect for 8 hours. For
instance, you could make yourself and ali your com-
panions immune to a Iich's Iifedrain attack.
Vouundo a single recent event by forcing a reroll of
any roll made within the last round (including your
last tum). Reality reshapes itself to accommodate the
new result. For example, a wishspell could undo an
opponent's successful save, a foe's criticai hit, or a
friend's failed save. Voucan force the reroll to be made
with advantage or disadvantage, and you can choose
whether to use the reroll or the original roll.
Vou might be able to achieve something beyond the
scope of the above examples. State your wish to the DM
as precisely as possible. The DM has great latitude in
ruling what occurs in such an instance; the greater the
wish, the greater the Iikelihood that something goes
wrong. This spell might simply fail, the effect you desire
might only be partly achieved, or you might suffer some
unforeseen consequence as a result of how you worded
the wish. For example, wishing that a villain were dead
might propel you forward in time to a period when that
villain is no longer alive, effectively removing you from
the game. Similarly, wishing for a legendary magic item
or artifact might instantly transport you to the presence
of the item's current owner.
The stress of casting this spell to produce any effect
other than duplicating another spell weakens you. After
enduring that stress, each time you cast a spell until
you finish a long rest, you take IdlO necrotic damage
per leveIof that spel!. This damage can't be reduced or
prevented in any way. In addition, your Strength drops
to 3, ifit isn't 3 or lower already, for 2d4 days. For each
of those days that you spend resting and doing nothing
more than Iight activity, your remaining recovery time
decreases by 2 days. Finally, there is a 33 percent
chance that you are unable to cast wishever again ifyou
suffer this stress.
WITCH BOLT
1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M(a twig from a tree that has been
struck by lightning)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Abeam of crackling, blue energy lances out toward
a creature within range, forming a sustained are of
Iightning between you and the target. Make a ranged
spell attack against that creature. On a hit, the target
takes Idl2 lightning damage, and on each ofyour tums
for the duration, you can use your action to deal ldl2
lightning damage to the target automatically. The spell
ends ifyou use your action to do anything else. The spellalso ends if the target is ever outside the spell's range or
ifit has total cover from you.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, the initial damage
increases by ldl2 for each slot levei above 1st.
WORD OF RECALL
6th-ievel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 5 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vouand up to fivewilling creatures within 5 feet ofyou
instantly teleport to a previously designated sanctuary.
Vouand any creatures that teleport with you appear in
the nearest unoccupied space to the spot you designated
when you prepared your sanctuary (see below). ]fyou
cast this spell without first preparing a sanctuary, the
spell has no effect.
Voumust designate a sanctuary by casting this spell
within a location, such as a temple, dedicated to or
strongly Iinked to your deity. Ifyou attempt to cast the
spell in this manner in an area that isn't dedicated to
your deity, the spell has no effect.
WRATHFUL SMITE
1st-ievei evocation
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range:Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hit with a melee weapon attack
during this spell's duration, your attack deals an extra
Id6 psychic damage. Additionally, ifthe target is a
creature, it must make a Wisdom saving throw or be
frightened ofyou until the spell ends. As an action, the
creature can make a Wisdom check against your spell
save DC to steel its resolve and end this spel!.
ZONE OF TRUTH
2nd-ievei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 10 minutes
Voucreate a magical zone that guards against deception
in a 15-foot-radius sphere centered on a point ofyour
choice within range. Until the spell ends, a creature
that enters the spell's area for the first time on atum
or starts its tum there must make a Charisma saving
throw. On a failed save, a creature can't speak a
deliberate lie while in the radius. Vouknow whether
each creature succeeds or fails on its saving throw.
An affected creature is aware of the spell and can thus
avoid answering questions to which it would normally
respond with alie. Such a creature can be evasive in
its answers as long as it remains within the boundaries
aflhe lrulh.
PART 3 ISPELLS
2
89
ApPENDIX A: CONDITIONS
ONDITIONS ALTER A CREATURE'S CAPABIUTlES IN
avariety ofwaysand can arise asaresult of
aspell, aclass feature, amonster's attack,
orother effect,Mostconditions, such as
blinded, are impairments, butafew,such as
invisible,canbeadvantageous,
Acondition lasts either untilitiscountered
(theprone condition iscountered bystanding
up,forexample)orforaduration specified bytheeffect
that imposed the condition,
Ifmultipieeffectsimpose the same condition ona
creature, each instance ofthecondition has itsown
duration, butthe condition's effectsdon'tgetworse,
Acreature either has acondition ordoesn't.
The following definitions specify what happens to
acreature while itissubjected toacondition,
BUNDED
Ablinded creature can't see and automatically fails
anyabilitycheck that requires sight.
Atlack rollsagainst thecreature haveadvantage. and
thecreature's atlack ralls havedisadvantage,
CHARMED
Acharmed creature can't attack the charmer ortarget
the charmer with harmful abilities ormagical effects,Thecharmer has advantage onanyabilitycheck to
interact sociallywiththe creature,
DEAFENED
• Adeafened creature can't hear and automatically fails
anyabilitycheck that requires hearing,
FRIGHTENED
Afrightened creature has disadvantage onability
checks and attack rollswhile the source ofitsfearis
within lineofsight.
The creature can't willinglymovecloser tothe source
ofitsfear,
GRAPPLED
Agrappled creature's speed becomes O,and itcan't
benefit fromanybonus toitsspeed.
The condition ends ifthegrappler isincapacitated
(seethe condition),
The condition also ends ifaneffectremoves the
grappled creature framthereach ofthegrappler or
grapplingeffect,suchaswhenacreature ishurled
awaybythe thunderwave spell.
INCAPACITATED
Anincapacitated creature can't take actions or
reactions.
•••
Levei Elfeel
1 Disadvantage on ability checks
2 Speed halved
3 Disadvantage on attack rolls and saving throws
4 Hit point maximum halved
5 Speed reduced to O
6 Death
If an already exhausted creature suffers another effeet that
causes exhaustion, itscurrent leveiaf exhaustion increases
by the amount specified in the effect's description.
A creature suffers the effect ofits current levei of
exhaustion as well as alllower leveis. For example, a creature
suffering levei 2 exhaustion has its speed halved and has
disadvantage on ability checks.
An effect that removes exhaustion reduces its levei as
specified in the effect's description, with ali exhaustion
effects ending if a creature's exhaustion levei is reduced
below 1.
Finishing a long rest reduces a creature's exhaustion levei
by 1, provided that the creature has also ingested some
food and drink.••
EXHAUSTION
Some special abilities and environmental hazards, such as
starvation and the long-term effects offreezing or scorching
temperatures, can lead to a special condition called
exhaustion. Exhaustion is measured in six leveis. An effect
can giveacreature one or more leveis Dfexhaustion, as
specified in the effect's description.
DEAFENEOPETRIFIED
A petrified creature is transformed, along with any
nonmagical object it is wearing or carrying, into a
solid inanimate substance (usually stone). Its weight
increases by a factor of ten, and it ceases aging.
The creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't
move or speak, and is unaware of its surroundings.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
The creature has resistance to ali damage.
The creature is immune to poison and disease,
although a poison or disease already in its system
is suspended, not neutralized.PARALYZED
A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see the condi-
tion) and can't move or speak.
The creature aulomatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
Any attack that hits the creature is a criticai hit if the
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
INVISIBLEINVISIBLE
An invisible creature is impossible to see without the
aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose of
hiding, the creature is heavily obscured. The crea-
ture's location can be detected by any noise it makes
or any tracks it leaves.
Attack rolls against the creature have disadvantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have advantage.
APPENDIX A.CONDITIONS
PorSONED
Apoisoned creature has disadvantage on attack rolls
and ability checks.
PRONE
Aprone creature's only movement option is to crawl,
unless itstands up and thereby ends the condition.
The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls.
An attack roll against the creature has advantage
ifthe attacker is within 5 feet ofthe creature.
Otherwise, the attack roll has disadvantage.
RESTRAINED
Arestrained creature's speed becomes 0, and itcan't
benefit from any bonus to its speed.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage.
The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity
saving throws.
STUNNED
Astunned creature is incapacitated (see the
condition), can't move, and can speak only
falteringly.
The creature automatica11y fails Strength
and Dexterity saving throws.
Attack ro11sagainst the creature have
advantage.
UNCONSCIOUS
An unconscious creature is incapacitated (see
the condition), can't move or speak, and is unaware
of its surroundings
The creature drops whatever it's holding and fa11s
prone.
The creature automatica11y fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
Attack ro11sagainst the creature have advantage.
Any altack that hits the creature is a criti.
cal hit ifthe attacker is within 5 feet
ofthe creature.
UNCONSCIOUS
APPENDIX A ICONDITIONS•••
oo
()PRONE
STUNNEOReSTRAINEO
o••
ApPENDIX B:GODS OFTHE MULTIVERSE
D&DPANTHEONS
THE FORGOTTEN REALMS
Dozens ofdeities are revered, worshiped, and feared
throughout the world ofthe Forgotten Realms. Atleast
thirly deities are widely known across the Realms, and
many more are worshiped locally, byindividual tribes,
small cults, or certain sects oflarger religious tempies.Each world in the D&D multiverse has its own
pantheons ofdeities, ranging in size from the teeming
pantheons ofthe Forgotten Realms and Greyhawk to
the more focused religions ofEberron and Dragonlance.
Many ofthe nonhuman races worship the same gods on
different worlds-Moradin, for example, is revered by
dwarves ofthe Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk, and many
other worlds.EBERRON
The world ofEberron has many different religions, but
the most important revolves around a pantheon called
the Sovereign Host and their malign shadow, the Dark
Six. The gods ofthe Sovereign Host are thought to have
dominion over every aspect ofexistence, and tospeak
with a unified voice. But the Dark Six are the primitive,
bloody, and cruel gods who offer a dissenting voice.
Eberron's other religions are very different from the
traditional D&D pantheons. The monotheistic Church
ofthe Silver Flame isdevoted to fighting against evil in
the world, but plagued bycorruption in its own ranks.
The philosophy ofthe Blood ofVolteaches that divinity
Iies within ali mortal beings and reveres the undead
who have secured lhat immortality. Various mad cults
are devoted to the demons and horrors imprisoned
in Eberron's Underdark (called Khyber, lhe Dragon
Below). The followers ofthe Path ofLight believe that
the world is heading toward a glorious future where
the shadows that cloud this world will be transformed
into Iight.And two relaled nations ofe1vesrevere their
ancestral spirits: lhe Undying Court, preserved as
spirits or even undead forms, and the glorified Spirits
ofthe Past, the great heroes ofaneient wars.DRAGONLANCE
The gods ofthe world ofKrynn are three families: seven
gods ofgood headed byPaladine and Mishakal, seven of
neutrality headed byGilean, and seven ofevil headed by
Takhisis and Sargonnas. These deities have been called
bymany different names and held in varying leveis of
esteem bydifferent peoples and cultures through the
world's history, but they are the only gods ofthis world-
their place fixed in the stars as constellations.
NONHUMAN DEITIES
Certain gods closely associated with nonhuman races
are revered on many different worlds, though not always
in the same way.The nonhuman races ofthe Forgotten
Realms and Greyhawk share these deities.
Nonhuman races often have whole pantheons of
their own. Besides Moradin, forexample, the dwarf
gods include Moradin's wife, Berronar Truesilver, and
a number ofother gods thought to be their children
and grandchildren: Abbathor, Clangeddin Silverbeard,
Dugmaren Brightmantle, Dumathoin, Gorm Gullhyn,
Haela Brightaxe, Marthammor Duin, Sharindlar, Thard
Harr, and Vergadain. Individual dans and kingdoms of
dwarves might revere some, ali, or none ofthese deities,
and some have other gods unknown (or known byother
names) to outsiders.GREYHAWK
The gods ofGreyhawk come from at least four different
pantheons, representing the faiths ofthe various ethnic
groups that populated lhe continent ofOerik over the
ages. As a result, there's a great deal ofoverlap in lheir
portfolios: Pelor is the Flan god ofthe sun and Pholtus
is the Oeridian sun god, forexample.
•••
••"""THE lIFE ANO DEATH DOMAINS
Many deities in this section suggest the Lifedomain,
particularly ifthey are dosely associated with healing,
protection, childbirth, nurturing, ar fertility. As described in
the chapter 3, though, the Lifedomain is incredibly broad,
and a deric of any non-evil deity can choose il.
Anumber of other deities, mostly evil ones, suggest the
Death domain, which is detailed in the DungeonMas!er's
Cuide.Most derics who choose this domain are evil NPCs,
but ifyou want to worship a god af death, consult your
Dungeon Master.
••ELIGION ISAN IMPORTANT PART OF LIFE IN
THEworlds ofthe D&D multiverse. When
gods walk the world, clerics channel divine
power, evil cults perform dark sacrifices in
subterranean lairs, and shining paladins
stand Iike beacons against the darkness, it's
hard to be ambivalent about the deities and
deny theirexistence.
Many people in the worlds ofD&D worship different
gods at different times and eircumstances. People in
the Forgotten Realms, forexample. might pray to Sune
for luck in love, make an offering toWaukeen before
heading to the market, and pray to appease Talos when
a severe storm blows in-ali in the same day. Many
people have a favorite among the gods, one whose ideais
and teachings they make their own. And a fewpeople
dedicate themselves entirely toa single god, usually
serving as a priest or champion oflhat god's ideais.
Your DMdetermines which gods, ifany, are worshiped
in his or her campaign. From among the gods available,
you can choose a single deity foryour character to
serve, worship, or pay Iipservice to.ar you can pick
a fewthat your character prays tomost often. ar just
make a mental note oflhe gods who are revered inyour
DM's campaign so you can invoke their names when
appropriate. ]fyou're playing a deric or a character with
the Acolyte background, decide which godyour deity
serves or served, and consider the deity's suggested
domains when selecting your character's domain.
APPENOIX B ICOosOF THE MULTIVERSE293
DEITIES OF THE FORGOTTEN REALMS
Deity
Auril, goddess of winter
Azuth, god of wizards
Bane, god of tyranny
Beshaba, goddess of misfortune
Bhaal, god of murder
Chauntea, goddess of agriculture
Cyric, god of lies
Deneir, god ofwriting
Eldath, goddess of peace
Gond, god of craft
Helm, god of protection
limater, god of endurance
Kelemvor, god of the dead
Lathander, god of birth and renewal
Leira, goddess of i1lusion
L1iira,goddess of joy
Loviatar, goddess of pain
Malar, god of the hunt
Mask, god of thieves
Mielikki, goddess of forests
Milil, god of poetry and song
Myrkul, god of death
Mystra, goddess of magic
Oghma, god of knowledge
Savras, god of divination and fate
SelOne, goddess of the moon
Shar, goddess of darkness and 1055
Silvanus, god of wild nature
Sune, goddess of love and beauty
Talona, goddess of disease and poison
Talos, god of storms
Tempus, god of war
Torm, god of courage and self.sacrifice
Tymora, goddess of good fortune
Tyr, god of justice
Umberlee, goddess of the sea
Waukeen, goddess of tradeAlignment
NE
LN
LE
CE
NE
NG
CE
NG
NG
N
LN
LG
LN
NG
CN
CG
LE
CE
CN
NG
NG
NE
NG
N
LN
CG
NE
N
CG
CE
CE
N
LG
CG
LG
CE
NSuggested Domains
Nature, Tempest
Knowledge
War
Trickery
Death
Life
Trickery
Knowiedge
Life, Nature
Knowledge
Life, Light
Life
Death
Life, Light
Trickery
Life
Death
Nature
Trickery
Nature
Light
Death
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge
Knowledge, Life
Death, Trickery
Nature
Life, Light
Death
Tempest
War
War
Trickery
War
Tempest
Knowledge, TrickerySymbol
Six.pointed snowflake
Left hand pointing upward, outlined in fire
Upright black right hand, thumb and fingers together
Black antlers
Skull surrounded bya ring of blood droplets
Sheaf of grain or a blooming rose over grain
White jawless skull on black or purple sunburst
Litcandle above an open eye
Waterfall plunging into still pool
Toothed cog with four spokes
Staring eye on upright left gauntlet
Hands bound at the wrist with red cord
Upright skeletal arm holding balanced scales
Road traveling into a sunrise
Point.down triangle containing a swirl of mist
Triangle of three six.pointed stars
Nine.tailed barbed scourge
Clawed paw
Black mask
Unicorn's head
Five.stringed harp made of leaves
White human skull
Orcle af seven stars, or nine starsencircling a
flowing red mist, or a single star
Blank scroll
Crystal ball containing many kinds of eyes
Pair of eyes surrounded by seven stars
Black disk encircled with a border
Oak leaf
Face of a beautiful red.haired woman
Three teardrops on atriangle
Three lightning bolts radiating from a central point
Upright flaming sword
White right gauntlet
Face.up coin
Balanced scales resting on awarhammer
Wave curling left and right
Upright coin with Waukeen's profile facing left
294\
APPEN[)IX B iOODS OF TIIE MULTIVERSE
DElllES OF GREYHAWK
Deity Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Beory, goddess of nature NNature Green disk
Boccob, god of magic NKnowledge Eyewithin a pentagram
Ce[estian, god of stars and wanderers N Knowledge Arc of seven stars inside a cirele
Ehlonna, goddess of woodlands NGLife, Nature Unicorn horn
Erythnul, god of envy and slaughter CE War Blood drop
Fharlanghn, god ofhorizons and travei NGKnow[edge, lrickery Cirele crossed bya curved horizon line
Heironeous, god of chivalry and valor LGWar Lightning bolt
Hextor, god of war and discord LE War Sixarrows facing downward in a fan
Kord, god of athletics and sport CGlempest, War Four spears and four maces radiating out
from a central point
Incabulos, god of plague and famine NE Death Reptilian eye with a horizontal diamond
Istus, goddess of fate and destiny NKnow[edge Weaver's spindle with three strands
luz, god of pain and oppression CE Death Grinning human skull
Nerull, god of death NEDeath Skull with either a sickle or a scythe
Obad.Hai, god of nature NNature Oak leaf and acorn
Olidammara, god of revelry CN lrickery Laughing mask
Pelor, god ofthe sun and hea[ing NG Life, Light Sun
Pholtus, god of [ight and law LGLight Silver sun or fu[1moon partia[ly eelipsed bya
smaller crescent moon
Ralishaz, god of illluck and insanity CN Trickery Three bone fate.casting sticks
Rao, god of peace and reason LGKnow[edge White heart
St. Cuthbert, god of common sense and zeal LN Knowledge Cirele at the center of a starburst of [ines
lharizdun, god of eterna[ darkness CETrickery Dark spiral or inverted ziggurat
Trithereon, god ofliberty and retribution CGWar lriskelion
Ulaa, goddess of hills and mountains LGLife, War Mountain with a cirele at its heart
Vecna, god of evil secrets NE Knowledge Hand with eye in the paim
Wee las, goddess of magic and death LNDeath, Knowledge Red skull in front of fireba[1
DElllES OF DRAGONLANCE
lhe Gods of Good Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Paladine, god of rulers and guardians LG War Silver triangle
Branchala, god of music NG Light Bard's harp
Habbakuk, god of animal rifeand the sea NGNature, Tempest Blue bird
Kiri.Jolith, god ofhonor and war LG War Bison's horns
Majere, god of meditation and order LGKnowledge Copper spider
Mishakal, goddess of healing LG Knowledge, Life B[ue infinity sign
Solinari, god of good magic LGno c1erics White circle or sphere
lhe Gods of Neutrality Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Gilean, god ofknowledge NKnowledge Open book
Chis[ev, goddess of nature N Nature Feather
Reorx, god of craft NKnow[edge Forging hammer
Shinare, goddess of wea[th and trade NKnowledge, Trickery Griffon's wing
Sirrion, god offire and change N Nature Mu[ti.colored fire
Zivilyn, god of wisdom NKnowledge Great green or gold tree
Lunitari, goddess of neutral magic Nno c1erics Red circ[e or sphere
lhe Gods of Evil Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Takhisis, goddess of night and hatred LE Death B[ack crescent
Chemosh, god of the undead LE Death Ye[low skull
Hiddukel, god oflies and greed CE Trickery Broken merchant's scales
Morgion, god of disease and secrecy NE Death Hood with two red eyes
Sargonnas, god ofvengeance and fire LE War Sty[ized red condor
Zeboim, goddess of the sea and storms CE Tempest Turtle shell
Nuitari, god of evil magic LE no derics Black cirele or sphere
APPENDIX B IGODS OF THE MULTI" ERSE
295
DEITIES OF EBERRON
The Sovereign Hosl Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
Arawai, goddess offerlilily NG Life, Nalure Sheaf of wheallied wilh green ribbon
Aureon, god oflaw and knowledge LN Knowledge Open lome
Balinor, god ofbeasls and lhe hunl N Life, Nalure Pair of anllers
Boldrei, goddess of communily and home LG Life Fire in a slone hearlh
Doi Arrah, goddess of sunlighl and honor LG Lighl, War Rising sun
Doi Dorn, god of slrenglh aI arms CG War Longsword crossed over a shield
Kol Korran, god of Irade and weallh N Trickery Nine-sided gold coin
Olladra, goddess of good forlune NG Life, Trickery Domino
Onalar, god of crafl NG Knowledge Crossed hammer and tongs
The Dark Si. Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
The Devourer, god of nature's wralh NE Tempest Bundle of five sharpened bones
The Fury, goddess ofwralh and madness NE War Winged wyrm wilh woman's head and
upper body
The Keeper, god of greed and dealh NE Death Dragonshard stone in the shape of a fang
The Mockery, god of violence and treachery NE War Five blood-spatlered tools
The Shadow, god of dark magic CE Knowledge Obsidian tower
The Traveler, deity of chaos and change CN Knowledge, Trickery Four crossed, rune-inscribed bones
Olher Failhs of Eberron Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
The Silver Flame, deily of protection and good LG Life, Light, War Flame drawn on silver or molded from silver
The Blood ofVol, philosophy ofimmortality LN Death, Life Slylized dragon skull on red teardrop gem
and undeath
Cults of the Dragon Below, deities of madness NE Trickery Varies
The PaIh of Light, philosophy of light and LN Life, Lighl Brilliant cryslal
self-improvemenl
The Undying Courl, elven ancestors NG Knowledge, Life Varies
The Spirits of the Past, elven ancestors CG War Varies
NONHUMAN DEITIES
Deily Alignmenl Suggesled Domains Symbol
Bahamut, dragon god of good LG Life, War Dragon's head in profile
Blibdoolpoolp, kuo-toa goddess NE Death Lobster head or black pearl
Corellon Larethian, elf deity of art and magic CG Light Quarter moon or starburst
Deep Sashelas, elf god of the sea CG Nature, Tempest Dolphin
Eadro, merfolk deity ofthe sea N Nature, Tempest Spiral design
Gari Glitlergold, gnome god oflrickery and wiles LG Trickery Gold nugget
Grolantor, hill giant god of war CE War Wooden c1ub
Gruumsh, ore god of storms and war CE Tempest, War Unblinking eye
Hruggek, bugbear god ofviolence CE War Morningstar
Kurtulmak, kobold god of war and mining LE War Gnome skull
Laogzed, troglodyte god ofhunger CE Death Image ofthe lizardjload god
Lolth, drow goddess of spiders CE Trickery Spider
Maglubiyel, goblinoid god of war LE War Bloodyaxe
Moradin, dwarf god of crealion LG Knowledge Hammer and anvil
Rillifane Rallathil, wood elf god of nature CG Nature Oak
Sehanine Moonbow, elf goddess of the moon CG Knowledge Crescent moon
Sekolah, sahuagin god of lhe hunt LE Nature, Tempesl Shark
Semuanya, lizardfolk deity of survival NLife Egg
Skerrit, centaur and satyr god of nature N Nature Oak growing from acorn
Skoraeus Stonebones, god of stone gianls and arl N Knowledge Slalactite
Surlur, god offire giants and craft LE Knowledge, War Flaming sword
Thrym, god of frost giants and strength CE War White double-bladed axe
Tiamat, dragon goddess of evil LE Trickery Dragon head with five claw marks
Yondalla, halfling goddess offerlility and protection LG Life Shield
296APPEND1X B IGODS orTHE MU LTIVERSE
FANTASy-HISTORICAL PANTHEONS
The Celtic, Egyptian, Greek, and Norse pantheons are
fantasy interpretations of historical religions from our
world's ancient times. They include deities tha! are
most appropriate for use in a 0&0game, divorced from
their historical context in the real world and united into
pantheons that serve the needs ofthe game.
THE CELTlC PANTHEON
It's said that something wild lurks in the heart ofevery
soul, a space that thrills to the sound ofgeese calling
aI night, to the whispering wind through the pines, to
the unexpected red ofmistletoe on an oak-and it is in
this space that the Celtic gods dwell. They sprang from
the brook and stream, their might heighlened bylhe
strength of the oak and lhe beauty of the woodlands and
open moor. When the first forester dared put a name to
the face seen in the bole ofa tree or the voice babbling
in a brook, these gods forced themselves into being.
The Celtic gods are as often served bydruids as by
c1erics. for they are c10selyaligned with the forces of
nature lhat druids revere.
THE GREEK PANTHEON
The gods ofOlympus make lhemselves known wilh the
gentle lap ofwaves against the shores and lhe crash of
the thunder among the c1oud-enshrouded peaks. The
thick boar-infested woods and the sere, olive-covered
hillsides hold evidence oftheir passing. Everyaspect
ofnature echoes with their presence, and they've made
a place for themselves inside the human hearl, 100.
THE EGYPTIAN PANTHEON
These gods are a young dynasty ofan ancienl divine
family, heirs to the rulership oflhe cosmos and lhe
mainlenance ofthe divine principie ofMa'al-lhe
fundamental order oflrulh, juslice, law,and order lhal
puts gods, mortal pharaohs, and ordinary men and
women in lhcir logical and rightful place in lhe universe.
The Egyptian panlheon is unusual in having lhree
gods wilh the Dealh domain ofdifferenl alignmenls.
Anubis is lhe lawful neulral god oflhe aflerlife, who
judges lhe souls of lhe dead. Set is a chaotic evil god
of murder, perhaps besl known for killing his brother
Osiris. And Nephlhys is a chaolic good goddess of
mourning. Thus, allhough most c1erics of lhe Dealh
domain (found in lhe Dungeon Master's Cuide) are
villainous characlers, c1erics who serve Anubis or
Nephlhys need nol be.
THE NORSE PANTHEON
Where lhe land plummels from the snowy hills inlo lhe
icy fjords below, where lhe longboals draw up on lo lhe
beach, where the glaciers flow forward and relreal wilh
every fali and spring-lhis is lhe land of the Vikings,
the home of lhe Norse panlheon. It's a brulal clime,
and one lhal calls for brulalliving. The warriors of
the land have had lo adapl lo lhe harsh condilions in
order lO survive, but lhey haven't been 100 lwisled by
CELTIC DEITIESlhe needs of lheir environment. Given lhe necessity of
raiding for food and wealth, il's surprising lhe mortais
lurned out as well as lhey did. Their powers reflecl
the need lhese warriors had for slrong leadership and
decisive action. Thus, lhey see lheir deities in every
bend of a river, hear them in lhe crash of lhe thunder
and lhe booming of lhe glaciers, and smell them in lhe
smoke of a burning longhouse.
The Norse pantheon includes two main families, the
Aesir (deilies of war and destiny) and lhe Vanir (gods
of ferlilily and prosperily). Once enemies, these lwo
families are now c10sely allied againsl lheir common
enemies, the gianls (including lhe gods Surlur and
Thrym). Like lhe gods of Greyhawk, gods in different
families somelimes have overlap in their spheres of
influence: Frey (of lhe Vanir) and Odur (of the Aesir)
are both associated with lhe sun, for example.
Deity
The Daghdha, god of wealher and crops
Arawn, god oflife and dealh
Belenus, god of sun, light, and warmth
Briganlia, goddess of rivers and livestock
Diancecht, god of medicine and healing
Dunatis, god of mountains and peaks
Goibhniu, god of smiths and healing
Lugh, god of arts, travei, and commerce
Manannan mac Lir,god ofoceans and seacreatures
Math Mathonwy, god of magic
Morrigan, goddess ofbattle
Nuada, god of war and warriors
Oghma, god of speech and writing
Silvanus, god of nature and forests
GREEK DEITlES
Deity
Zeus, god of the sky, ruler of the gods
Aphrodite, goddess of love and beauty
Apollo, god of light, music, and healing
Ares, god of war and strife
Artemis, goddess ofhunting and childbirth
Athena, goddess of wisdom and civilization
Demeter, goddess of agriculture
Dionysus, god of mirth and wine
Hades, god ofthe underworld
Hecale, goddess of magic and the moon
Hephaestus, god of smithing and craft
Hera, goddess of marriage and intrigue
Hercules, god of strength and adventure
Hermes, godcftraveiandcommerce
Hestia, goddess of home and family
Nike, goddess of victory
Pan, god of nature
Poseidon, god of the sea and earthquakes
Tyche, goddess of good fortune
APPENDlX B IGOuS OFTHE MULTIVERSEAlignment
CG
NE
NG
NG
LG
N
NG
CN
LN
NE
CE
N
NG
N
Alignment
N
CG
CG
CE
NG
LG
NG
CN
LE
CE
NG
CN
CG
CG
NG
LN
CN
CN
NSuggested Domains
Nature, Trickery
Life, Death
Light
Life
Life
Nature
Knowledge, Life
Knowledge, Life
Nature, Tempest
Knowledge
War
War
Knowledge
Nature
Suggested Domains
Tempest
Light
Knowledge, Life, Light
War
Life, Nature
Knowledge, War
Life
Life
Death
Knowledge, Trickery
Knowledge
Trickery
Tempest, War
Trickery
Life
War
Nature
Tempest
TrickerySymbol
Bubbling cauldron or shield
Black star on gray background
Solar disk and standing stones
Footbridge
Crossed oak and mistletoe branches
Red sun-capped mountain peak
Giant mallet over sword
Pair of long hands
Wave of white water on green
Staff
Two crossed spears
Silver hand on black background
Unfurled scroll
Summer oak tree
Symbol
Fist full of lightning bolts
Sea shell
Lyre
Spear
Bow and arrow on lunar disk
Owl
Mare's head
Thyrsus (staff tipped with pine cone)
Black ram
Setting moon
Hammer and anvil
Fan of peacock feathers
Lion's head
Caduceus (winged staff and serpents)
Hearth
Winged woman
Syrinx (pan pipes)
Trident
Red pentagram
ECYPTlAN DEITIEs
Deity Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Re-Horakhty, god ofthe sun, ruler ofthe gods LG Life, Light Solar dísk encírcled byserpent
Anubis, god of judgment and death LNDeath Black jackal
Apep, god of evil, fire, and serpents NE Trickery Flaming snake
Bast, goddess of cats and vengeance CG War Cat
Bes, god of luck and musíc CN Tríckery Image ofthe misshapen deíty
Hathor, goddess of love, music, and NGLife, Light Horned cow's head with lunar disk
motherhood
Imhotep, god of crafts and medicine NGKnowledge Step pyramid
Isis, goddess of fertilíty and magíc NG Knowledge, Life Ankh and star
Nephthys, goddess of death and grief CG Death Horns around a lunar dísk
Osiris, god of nature and the underworld LGLife, Nature Crook and fiail
Ptah, god of crafts, knowledge, and secrets LN Knowledge Buli
Set, god of darkness and desert storms CE Death, Tempest, Coiled cobra
Trickery
Sobek, god of water and crocodiles LE Nature, Tempest Crocodile head with horns and plumes
Thoth, god of knowledge and wisdom N Knowledge Ibis
NORSE DEITIES
Deity Alignment Suggested Domains Symbol
Odin, god ofknowledge and war NG Knowledge, War Watching blue eye
Aegir, god of the sea and storms NE Tempest Rough ocean waves
Balder, god of beauty and poetry NG Life, Light Gem-encrusted silver chalice
Forsetí, god ofjustice and law NLight Head of a bearded man
Frey, god of fertilíty and the sun NG Life, Light Ice-blue greatsword
Freya, goddess of fertility and love NG Life Falcon
Frigga, goddess ofbirth and fertility NLife, Light Cat
Heimdall, god of watchfulness and loyalty LG Light, War Curling musical horn
Hei, goddess of the underworld NE Death Woman's face, rottíng on one side
Hermod, god of luck CN Trickery Winged scroll
Loki, god of thíeves and trickery CE Trickery Flame
Njord, god of sea and wind NG Nature, Tempest Gold coin
Odur, god oflíght and the sun CG Light Solar disk
Síf, goddess of war CG War Upraísed sword
Skadi, god of earth and mountains N Nature Mountain peak
Surtur, god of fire giants and war LE War Flaming sword
Thor, god of storms and thunder CG Tempest, War Hammer
Thrym, god of fire giants and cold CE War White double-bladed axe
Tyr, god of courage and strategy LN Knowledge, War Sword
Uller, god ofhunting and winter CNNature Longbow
J
f
APPENOIX B ICOosOF THE MULTIVfRSE
299
ApPENDIX c:THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE
••
3
00rNCREDlBLYVAST lS THE COSMOS OF THE
DUNGEONS &DRAGONSgame, which teems
with amultitude ofworlds as weJlas myriad
alternate dimensions ofreality, calIed the planes
ofexistence. ltencompasses every world
where Dungeon Masters run their adventures,
alIwithin the relatively mundane realm ofthe
Material Plane. Beyond lhat plane are domains
ofraw elemental matter and energy, realms ofpure
thought and ethos, the homes ofdemons and angels,
and the dominions ofthe gods.
Many spelIs and magic items can draw energy
from these planes, summon the creatures that dwelI
there, communicate with their denizens, and alIow
advenlurers totravei there. Asyour character achieves
greater power and higher leveIs,you might undertake
aquest torescue afriend fram the horrific depths of
the Abyss, or findyourself hoisting atankard with lhe
friendly giants ofYsgard. Voumight walk on streets
made ofsolid fireor lest your mettle on abattlefield
where lhe falIen are resurrected with each dawn.
THE MATERIAL PLANE
The Material Plane isthe nexus where the philosophical
and elemental forces tha! define the other planes colIide
inlhejumbled existence ofmortal lifeand mundane
matter. AlIthe worlds of0&0 exist within the Material
Plane, making itthe starting point formost campaigns
and adventures. The rest ofthe multiverse isdefined in
relation tothe Material Plane.
The worlds ofthe Material Plane are infinitely diverse,
forlhey reflect the creative imagination ofthe DMs
who set their games there, as weJlas the players whose
heroes adventure there. They include magic-wasled
desert planets and island-dotted waler worlds, worlds
where magic combines with advanced technology and
others trapped inan endless Stone Age,worlds where
the gods walk and places they have abandoned.
POSITIVE PLANE
OUTER PLANES
APPENDIX C ITHE PLANES OF EXISTENCEThe best-known worlds inlhe multiverse are lhe
ones lha! have been published as officialcampaign
settings forthe 0&0 game over the years-Greyhawk,
Blackmoor, Dragonlance, the Forgotten Realms,
Mystara, Birthright, Dark Sun, and Eberron, among
others. Each ofthese worlds boasts itsown cast of
heroic adventurers and scheming villains, itsown
ancient ruins and forgotten artifacts, itsown dungeons
and itsown dragons. Butifyour campaign takes place
on one ofthese worlds, itbelongs toyour DM-you
mighl imagine itas one ofthousands ofparalIel versions
ofthe world, which might diverge wildly from the
published version.
MATERIAL ECHOES
The Material Plane isarichly magical place, and its
magical nalure isreflected inthe two planes that share
itscentral place inthe multiverse. The Feywild and the
ShadowfelI are paralIel dimensions occupying the same
cosmological space, so they are often calIed echo planes
or mirrar planes tothe Material Plane. The worlds and
landscapes ofthese planes mirror lhe natural world
ofthe Material Plane but reflect those fealures into
different forms-more marvelous and magical inthe
Feywild, distorted and colorless inthe Shadowfell.
Where avolcano stands inthe Malerial Plane, a
mountain topped with skyscraper-sized crystals that
glow with internai fire towers inlhe Feywild, and a
jagged rock outcrapping resembling askuJl marks the
spot on the Shadowfell.
The Feywild, also calIed the Plane ofFaerie, isaland
ofsoft lights and wonder, acountry oflittle people with
great desires, aplace ofmusic and death. ltisarealm
ofeternal twilight, with slow lanterns bobbing inthe
gentle breeze and huge fireflies buzzing through graves
and fields. The sky isalight with the faded colors of
lhe setting, or perhaps rising, sun. But, infact, the sun
nevertruly sets or rises; itremains stationary, dusky
and lowinthe sky.Awayfram the settled areas ruled by
the Seelie Court, lhe land isatangle ofsharp-toothed
brambles and syrupy fens-perfect territory forthe
Unseelie tohunt their prey. Feycreatures, such as those
brought tothe world by conjure woad/and beings and
similar spelIs, dwelI inthe Feywild.
The Shadowfell, also calIed the Plane afShadaw, is
adarkly lighted dimension, aworld afblack and white
where colar has been leached fram everything. ltisa
placeaftaxic darkness that hates the light, where the
sky isablack vault with neither sun nor stars.
•••
POSITIVE ANO NEGATIVE PLANES
Likeadome above the other planes, the Positive Plane isthe
source ofradianl energy and lhe rawlifeforce lhal suffuses
allliving beings, from lhe punylo lhe sublime, Ilsdark
refleclion islhe Negative Plane, lhe source ofnecrolic energy
lhal deslroys lhe Iivingand animales lhe undead .
....•----------------------- ..
BEYOND THE MATERIAL
Beyond the Material Plane. the various planes of
existence are realms ofmyth and mystery. They're
not simply other worlds. but different qualities of
being, formed and governed byspiritual and elemental
principIes abstracted fram the ordinary world.
PLANAR TRAVEL
When adventurers travei into other planes ofexistence,
they are undertaking a legendary journey acrass the
thresholds ofexistence toa mythic destination where
they strive tocomplete their quest. Such ajourney isthe
stuff oflegend. Braving the realms ofthe dead. seeking
out the celestial servants ofa deity.or bargaining with
an efreeti in its home citywill be the subject ofsong and
story foryears tocome.
TraveI tothe planes beyond the Material Plane can be
accomplished in two ways: bycasting aspell or byusing
aplanar portal.
SpeJls.Anumber ofspells allow direct or indirect
access toother planes ofexistence. Plane shift and
gatecan transport adventurers directly toany other
plane ofexistence. with different degrees ofprecision.
Etherealness allows adventurers to enter the Ethereal
Plane and traveI fram there toany ofthe planes it
touches-the Shadowfell. the Feywild. or the Elemental
Planes. And the astral projection spelllets adventurers
praject themselves into the Astral Plane and traveI to
the Outer Planes.
Porta/s.Aportal isageneral term forastationary
interplanar connection that links a specific location
on one plane toaspecific location on another. Some
portaIs are like doorways, a clear window, or afog-
shrauded passage, and simply stepping through it
effects the interplanar traveI. Others are locations-
circles ofstanding stones, soaring towers. sailing ships,
or even whole towns-that exist inmultiple planes at
once or flicker from one plane toanother in turnoSome
are vortices, typically joining an Elemental Plane with a
very similar location on the Material Plane. such as the
heart ofavoleano (leading tothe Plane ofFire) or the
depths ofthe ocean (tothe Plane ofWater).
TRANSITIVE PLANES
The Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane are called the
Transitive Planes. They are mostly featureless realms
that serve primarily as ways totraveI from one plane
toanother. Spells such as etherealness andastral
projectionallow characters toenter these planes and
traverse them toreach the planes beyond.
The Ethereal Plane isa misty, fog-bound dimension
that issometimes described as agreat oceano Itsshores,
called the Border Ethereal. overlap the Material Plane
and the lnner Planes, so that every location on those
planes has acorresponding location on the Ethereal
Plane. Certain creatures can see into the Border
Ethereal. and the see invisibility andtrue seeing spell
grunt that ability. Some magical effects also extend fram
the Material Plane into the Border Ethereal. particularly
effects that use force energy such as forcecageandwallof force.The depths ofthe plane, the Deep Ethereal, are
a region ofswirling mists and colorful fogs.
The Astral Plane isthe realm ofthought and dream.
where visitors traveI as disembodied souls toreach
the planes ofthe divine and demonic. Itisagreat,
silvery sea. the same above and below, with swirling
wisps ofwhite and gray streaking among motes oflight
resembling distant stars. Erratic whirlpools ofcolor
flicker inmidair like spinning coins. Occasional bits of
solid matter can be found here, but most ofthe Astral
Plane isan endless. open domain.
INNER PLANES
The Inner Planes surround and enfold the Material
Plane and its echoes, providing the raw elemental
substance from which ali the worlds were made. The
four Elemental Planes-Ai r,Earth. Fire, and Water-
form aring araund the Material Plane. suspended
within the churning Elemental Chaos.
Attheir innermost edges. where they are closest
tothe Material Plane (inaconceptual ifnot a literal
geographical sense). the four Elemental Planes
resemble aworld inthe Material Plane. The four
elements mingle together as they doin the Material
Plane. forming land. sea. and sky.Farther from the
Material Plane. though, the Elemental Planes are both
alien and hostile. Here, the elements exist intheir
purest form-great expanses ofsolid earth. blazing fire.
crystal-clear water, and unsullied air. These regions
are little-known. so when discussing the Plane ofFire.
forexample, aspeaker usually means just the border
region. Atthe farthest extents ofthe Inner Planes,
the pure elements dissolve and bleed together into an
unending tumult ofclashing energies and colliding
substance, the Elemental Chaos.
OUTER PLANES
Ifthe Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy that
makes up the multiverse, the Outer Planes are the
direction. thought and purpose forsuch construction.
Accordingly. many sages refer tothe Outer Planes as
divine planes, spiritual planes. or godly planes, forthe
Outer Planes are best known as the homes ofdeities.
When discussing anything todowith deities, the
language used must be highly metaphorical. Their
actual homes are not literally "places" at ali, but
exemplify the idea that the Outer Planes are realms of
thought and spirit. Aswith the Elemental Planes, one
can imagine the perceptible part ofthe Outer Planes as
asort ofborder region, while extensive spiritual regions
liebeyond ordinary sensory experience.
Even inthose perceptible regions, appearances
can be deceptive. Initially. many ofthe Outer Planes
appear hospitable and familiar to natives ofthe
Material Plane. But the landscape can change at the
whims ofthe powerful forces that liveon the Outer
Planes. The desires ofthe mighty forces that dwell on
these planes can remake them completely, effectively
erasing and rebuilding existence itself tobettcr fulfill
their own needs.
APPENDlx C I THE PL~NES Df FXISTENCE
3°1
OTHER PLANES
Existing somehow between orbeyondthe known planes
ofexistence are avariety ofother realms.The planes with some element ofgoodintheir nature
are called the Upper Planes. Celestial creatures such
asangels and pegasi dwellinthe Upper Planes. Planes
with some element ofevilare the Lower Planes. Fiends
such asdemons, devils,andyugoloths dwellinthe
Lower Planes. Aplane's alignment isitsessence, and
acharacter whose alignment doesn't match the plane's
experiences aprofound sense ofdissonance there.
When agoodcreature visits Elysium,forexample, it
feelsintune with the plane, butanevilcreature feels
outoftune and more than alittleuncomfortable.Distance isavirtually meaningless concept onthe
Outer Planes. The perceptible regions ofthe planes
oftenseem quitesmall, buttheycan alsostretch onto
what seems likeinfinity.Itmight bepossible totake
aguided tourofthe NineHells,fromthe firstlayerto
the ninth, inasingle day-if the powers ofthe Hells
desire il.Oritcould take weeks fortravelers tomake a
grueling trek across asingle layer.
The most well-known Outer Planes are agroup of
sixteen planes that correspond tothe eightalignments
(excludingneutrality) and the shades ofdistinction
between them.
DEMIPLANES
Demiplanes are small extradimensional spaces with
their ownunique rules. Theyare pieces ofreality that
don'tseemtofitanywhere else. Demiplanes come
intobeingbyavariety ofmeans. Some are created by
spells, such as demiplane,orgenerated atthe desire ofa
powerful deityorother force.Theymayexist naturally,
asafoldofexisting reality that has been pinched olf
fromthe rest ofthe multiverse, oras ababyuniverse
growing inpower.Agivendemiplane can beentered
through asingle pointwhere ittouches another plane.
Theoretically, a plane shiftspell can alsocarry travelers
toademiplane, butthe proper frequency required
forthe tuning forkisextremely hard toacquire. The
gatespell ismore reliable, assuming the caster knows
ofthe demiplane.
THE FAR REALM
The Far Realm isbeyondthe known muItiverse. Infact,
itmight beanentirely separate multiverse with itsown
physical and magical laws.Where stray energies from
the Far Realm leakontoanother plane, lifeand matter
are warped and twisted intoalien shapes that defy
ordinary geometry and biology.
Theentities that abide inthe Far Realm are toa alien
foranormal mind toaccept without damage. Titanic
creatures swim through nothingness, preoccupied
withmadness. Unspeakable things whisper awful
truths tothose whodare listen. Formortais, knowledge
ofthe Far Realm Isatriumph ofmindoverthe rude
boundaries ofmatter, space, and eventually sanity.
There are noknown portaIs lothe FarRealm, or
atleast none that are stillviable.Ancientelvesonce
pierced theboundary ofeons withavastportal tothe
Far Realm within amountain called Firestorm Peak,
buttheir civilization imploded inbloodyterror and
theportaI's location-even itshome world-is long-
forgotten. Other portaIs might stillexist, marked bythe
alien forces leaking through tocorrupt the Material
Plane around them.planes. That argument might becircular, however,
foritispossible that thearrangement ofthe Outlands
inspired the ideaofthe Great Wheel inthe firstplace.
Around theoutside edgeofthe circle,evenlyspaced,
are the gate-towns: sixleen settlements, each built
around aportal leading tooneofthe Outer Planes. Each
townshares manyofthecharacteristics ofthe plane
where itsgateleads.
Atthe center ofthe Outlands, likethe axle ofthe
planar wheel,the Spire shoots impossibly highintothe
sky.Abovethis thin peak floatsthe ring-shaped cityof
Sigil,the CityofDoors. This bustling planar metropolis
holds countless portais toother planes and worlds.
Sigilisatrader's city.Goods, merchandise, and
information come toitfromacross the planes. There
isabrisk trade ininformation about the planes, in
particular inthe command words oritems required for
the operation ofparticular portais. These portal keys
are highlysought after,and manytravelers within the
cityare looking foraparticular portal oraportal key
toallowthem tocontinue ontheir way.Alignment
LG
NG, LG
NG
NG,CG
CG
CN,CG
CN
CN,CE
CE
NE, CE
NE
NE, LE
LE
LN, LE
LN
LN, LGOuter Plane
Mount Celestia, the Seven Heavens of
Bytopia, the Twin Paradises of
Elysium, the Blessed Fields of
The Beastlands, the Wilderness of
Arborea, the Olympian Glades of
Ysgard, the Heroie Domains of
Limbo, the Ever-Changing Chaos of
Pandemonium, the Windswept Depths of
The Abyss, the Innnite Layers of
Careeri, the Tarterian Depths of
Hades, the Gray Waste of
Gehenna, the Bleak Eternity of
The Nine Hells (of Baator)
Aeheron, the Innnite Battleneld of
Meehanus, the Cloekwork Nirvana of
Areadia, the Peaeeable Kingdoms ofOUTER PLANES
SIGIL AND THE OUTLANDS
The Outlands istheplane between theOuter Planes, a
plane ofneutrality, butnotthe neutrality ofnothingness.
Instead itincorporates alittleofeverything, keeping it
aliinaparadoxical balance-simultaneously concordant
and inopposition. Itisabroad region ofvaried terrain,
withopen prairies, towering mountains, and twisting,
shallow rivers,strongly resembling anordinary world
ofthe Material Plane.
The Outlands iscircular, likeagreat wheel-in fact,
Ihose whoenvlsion the Ouler Planes asawheel point
tothe Outlands as proof,calling ilamicrocosm ofthe
3
02APPENDIX C ITHE PLANES OF EXISTENCE
pOSITIVE PLANE
APPENDIX C THE PL\NES OF EXISTENCE
'103
ApPENDIX D:CREATURE STATISTICS
BAT
Tinybeasl, unaligned
Echolocation. While it can't hear, the bat has no blindsight.
Keen Heoring. The bat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on hearing.Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages-
Challenge 0(10 XP)CHA
5 (-3)WIS
9 (-1)INT
2(-4)CON
12 (+1)DEX
11 (+0)STR
13 (+1)
Charge.Ifthe boar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
creature right before hitting it with a tusk attack, the target
takes an extra 3 (1d6) slashing damage and must succeed on a
De11 5trength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after the Boar Finishes aShort arLong
Rest).Ifthe boar takes damage that reduces it to Ohit points,
unless the damage is 7 or more or from a criticai hit, it drops to
1 hit point instead.
ACTlONS
Tusk. Melee Weopon Atlack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit:4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.BOAR
Medium beasl, unaligned
Senses passive Perception 9
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
CHA
4 (-3)WIS
12 (+1)INT
2 (-4)CON
8 (-1)DEX
15 (+2)PELLS AND CLASS FEATURES ALLOW CHARACTERS
totransform into animaIs, summon creatures
toserve as familiars, and create undead.
Statistics forsuch creatures are grouped
in this appendix foryour convenience. For
information on how toread a stat block, see
theMonster Manual.
STR
2 (-4)Armar Class 12
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft.
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., onecreature.
Hit:1 piercing damage.BROWNBEAR
Largebeasl, una/igned
BLACKBEAR
Medium beasl, unalignedArmor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 34 (4d10 + 12)
Speed 40 ft., c1imb 30 ft.
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.STR
19 (+4)DEX
10 (+0)CON
16 (+3)INT
2 (-4)WIS
13 (+1)CHA
7 (-2)
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)STR
15 (+2)DEX
10 (+0)CON
14 (+2)INT
2 (-4)WIS
12 (+1)CHA
7(-2)Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smel!.
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smel!.ACTIONS
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks, one with its bite and
one with its c1aws.
ACTIONS
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks, one with its bite and
one with its c1aws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
H/t:5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Atlaek: +3 to hit, reach 5ft., one target.
Hit:7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.Bite.Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
H/t:8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attock: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit:11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.
3°4APPENDIX oICREATURE STATISTICS
CAT
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 40 ft., c1imb 30 fI.ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weopan Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5ft., one targel.
Hit:7 (ldl0 + 2) piercing damage, and the target is grappled.
Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the
crocodile can't bite another targel.
STR
3 (-4)DEX
15 (+2)CON
10 (+0)INT
3(-4)WIS
12 (+1)CHA
7(-2)DIREWOLF
Largebeast, unaligned
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
ChallengeO(10 XP)Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 37 (5dl0 + 10)
Speed 50 fI.
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)Keen Smell. The cat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smel!.
ACTIONS
Claws. Melee Weapan Attaek: +0 to hit. reach 5ft., one targel.
Hit:1 slashing damage.STR
17 (+3)DEX
15 (+2)CON
15 (+2)INT
3 (-4)WIS
12 (+1)CHA
7(-2)
CONSTRICTOR SNAKE
Largebeast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (2dl0 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smel!.
Paek Taeti,s. The wolf has advantage on atlack rolls against a
creature ifat least one of the wolf's allies is within 5feet of the
creature and isn't incapacitated.
ACTIONS
Senses blindsight 10 fI.. passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
ACTIONSSTR
15 (+2)DEX
14 (+2)CON
12 (+1)INT
1(-5)WIS
10 (+0)CHA
3 (-4)Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 to hit, reach 5ft., one target.
Hit:10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. Ifthe target is a creature,
it must succeed on a De13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.
FROG
Tiny beast, unaligned
Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 11
Languages -
ChallengeO (OXP)Armor Class 11
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 20 fI., swim 20 ft.Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5ft., one creature.
Hit:5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Constriet. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5ft., one
creature. Hit:6 (ld8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target
is grappled. Until this grapple ends, the creature is restrained,
and the snake can't constrict another target.
CROCODILE
Large beast, unalignedSTR
1(-5)DEX
13 (+1)CON
8 (-1)INT
1(-5)WIS
8 (-1)CHA
3 (-4)
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3dl0 + 3)
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 fI.
STR
15 (+2)DEX
10 (+0)CON
13 (+1)INT
2 (-4)WIS
10 (+0)CHA
5(-3)Amphibious. The frog can breathe air and water.
Standing Leap. As part ofits movement and without a running
start, the frog can long jump up to 10 feet and high jump
up to 5feel.
Skills Stealth +2
Senses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Ch~lIenge 1/2 (100 XP)
Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 15 minutes.
APPENDIX oCRE \TURE STATISTICS
3
05
GIANTEAGLE
Large beast, neutral good
Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 10 fI., Ay80 fI.Web (Recharge 5-6).Ranged Weapon Alloek: +5 lo hil, range
30 fl./60 fI., one crealure. H/I: The largel is reslrained by
webbing. As an aclion, lhe reslrained largel can make a DC
12 51renglh check, bursling lhe webbing on a success. lhe
webbing can also be allacked and deslroyed (AC 10; hp 5;
vulnerabilily lo fire damage; immunily lo bludgeoning, paison,
and psychic damage).
Skills Perceplion +4
Senses passive Perceplion 14
Languages Gianl Eagle, underslands Common bul doesn'l
speak il
Challenge 1 (200 XP)SIR
16 (+3)DEX
17 (+3)CON
13 (+1)INI
8 (-1)WIS
14 (+2)CHA
10 {+O}HAWK (FALCON)
Tiny beasl, unaJigned
Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 10 fI., Ay60 fI.
Skills Perceplion +4
Senses passive Perceplion 14
Languages -
ChallengeO(10 XP)Keen Sight. lhe eagle has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks Ihal rely on sighl.
ACIIONS
Mu/tiattack. lhe eagle makes Iwo allacks, one wilh ils beak
and one wilh ils lalons.SIR
5(-3)DEX
16 (+3)CON
8 (-1)INT
2 (-4)WIS
14 (+2)CHA
6(-2)
GIANT SPIDER
Large beast, unaJignedBeak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5fI., one largel.
H/t:6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.
Talons. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5fI., one largel.
Hit:10 (2d6 + 3) slashing damage.
Armar Class 14 (nalural armar)
Hil Poinls 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 30 fI., c1imb 30 fI.
SIR
14 (+2)DEX
16 (+3)CON
12 (+1)INI
2 (-4)WIS
11 (+O)CHA
4 (-3)Keen Sight. lhe hawk has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks Ihal relyon sighl.
ACTIONS
Talons. Melee Weopon Altaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5fI., one largel.
Hit:1slashing damage.
IMP
Tinyfiend (devi/, shapechanger), lawful evil
Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 10 (3d4 + 3)
Speed 20 fI., Ay40 ft. (20 fI. in ral form;20 fI., Ay60 fI. in raven
form;20 fI., c1imb 20 fI. in spider form)
Skills Deceplion +4, Insighl +3, Persuasion +4, Sleallh +5
Damage Resislances cold; bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing
fromnonmagical weapons Ihal aren'lsilvered
Damage Immunilies fire, poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 11
Languages Infernal, Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Shapechanger. lhe imp can use ils aclion lo polymorph inlo
lhe beasl formof aral,a raven,ara spider,arinlo ils devil
formo115slalislics arelhe same in each form,allhough ils
allack is dilferenl in some of Ihem. Any equipmenl il carries is
nollransformed. Ifslain, lhe imp reverls lo ils devil formo
Devil's Sight. Magical darkness doesn'l impede lhe
imp's darkvision.
Magic Resistance. lhe imp has advanlage on saving lhrows
againsl spells and olher magical elfecls.
306Skills Sleallh +7
Senses blindsighll0 fI., darkvision 60 fI., passive Perceplion 10
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Spider Climb. lhe spider can c1imb diflicull surfaces, including
upside down on ceilings, wilhoul needing lo make an
abilily check.
Web Sense. While in conlacl wilh a web, lhe spider knows lhe
exacllocalion of any olher crealure in conlacl wilh lhe same web.
Web Walker. lhe spider ignores movemenl reslriclions caused
by webbing.
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5fI., one crealure.
H/t:7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage, and lhe largel must make a
De 11 Conslilulion saving lhrow, laking 9 (2d8) poison damage
on a failed save, arhalf as much damage on a successful one. If
lhe poison damage reduces lhe largel lo Ohil poinls, lhe largel
is slable bul poisoned for 1hour, and paralyzed while poisoned
in lhis way.
APPENDIX D ICREATURE STATISTlCSSTR
6 (-2)DEX
17 (+3)CON
13 (+1)INI
11 {+O}WIS
12 (+1)CHA
14 (+2)
ACTIONS
Sting (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 to hit,
reach 5ft., one creature. Hit:5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage, and
the target must make on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw,
taking lO (3d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
Invisibility. lhe imp tums invisible until it attacks or until its
concentration ends. Anything the invisible imp is carrying or
wearing is invisible as long as it remains in contact with the imp.
LION
Large beast, unalignedPounce.Ifthe lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target right before hitting it with a c1aw attack, the target must
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked
prone. Iflhe largel is prone, the lion can lake a bonus aclion lo
make one bite attack against it.
Running Leal'. As parI of ils movement and after a 10-foot
running slart, the lion can long jump up to 25 feet.
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit:7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hit, reach 5 ft., one larget.
Hit:6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.
Armar Class 12
Hit Points 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 50 ft.MASTIFF
Medium beast, unaligned
Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Challenge 1 (200 XP)Armor elass 12
Hit Points 5 (ld8 + 1)
Speed 40 ft.STR
17 (+3)DEX
15 (+2)CON
13 (+1)INT
3 (-3)WIS
12 (+1)CHA
8 (-1)
STR
13 (+1)DEX
14 (+2)eON
12 (+1)INT
3 (-4)WIS
12 (+1)eHA
7 (-2)
ACTIONSACTIONS
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 fI.,one largel.
Hit:4 (ld4+2) bludgeoning damage.
3
07eHA
5 (-3)WIS
10 (+0)INT
2 (-4)eON
13 (+1)DEX
10 (+0)STR
14 (+2)
Beast ofBurden. lhe mule is considered to be a Large animal
for the purpose of determining its carrying capacily.
Sure.Footed. Whenever the mule would be knocked prone, il
stays on ils feel ifil succeeds on a DC 10 Dexterily saving Ihrow.KeenHearing and Smell. The masliffhas advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks thal rely on hearing or smel!.
MULE
Medium beast, unolignedBite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 lo hit, reach 5fI., one target. Hit:
4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage. Ifthe larget is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Slrength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Armar elass 10
Hit Poinls 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
ehallenge 1/8 (25 XP)
Senses passive Perception lO
Languages -
ehallenge 1/8 (25 XP)Keen Smell. lhe lion has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.
Pack Tacties. The lion has advantage on attack rolls against a
creature if at least one of the lion's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and isn't incapacitated.
OWL
Tiny beast, unalignedPOISONOUS SNAKE
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 11
Hil Poinls 1(ld4 - 1)
Speed 5fI.,fly60 fI.Armor Class 13
Hil Poinls 2 (ld4)
Speed 30fI., swim 30fI.
STR
3(-4)DEX
13 (+1)CON
8 (-1)INT
2 (-4)WIS
12(+1)CHA
7(-2)STR
2(-4)DEX
16 (+3)CON
11(+0)INI
1(-5)WIS
10(+0)CHA
3(-4)
Skills Perceplion +3, 51eallh+3
Senses darkvision 120fI., passive Perceplion 13
Languages -
Challenge O(lOXP)Senses blindsighl10 fI., passive Perceplion 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/8 (25XP)
F/yby.lhe owl provokes noopporlunily allacks when ilflies
oul ofan enemy's reach.
Keen Sight.lhe owlhas advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks Ihal relyon sighl.ACTIONS
Bile. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5lo hil, reach 5fI., one largel.
Hit:1piercing damage, and lhe largel musl make a DC10
Conslilulion saving Ihrow, laking 5(2d4) poison damage on a
failed save, or halfas much damage on asuccessful one.
ACTIONS
Talons. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3lo hil, reach 5fI., one largel.
Hit:1slashing damage.PSEUDODRAGON
Tiny dragon, neutral good
PANTHER
Medium beast, unalignedArmor Class 13(nalural armor)
Hil Poinls 7(2d4 +2)
Speed 15fI., fly60ft.
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4lo hil, reach 5fI.,one largel.
Hit:5(ld6 +2) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5fI.,one largel.
Hit:4 (ld4 +2) slashing damage.Keen Smefl.lhe panlher has advanlage on Wisdom
(Perceplion) checks Ihal relyon smell.
Pounee.Iflhe panlher moves alleasl 20feel slraighlloward
acrealure righl before hilling ilwilh ac1awallack, lhe largel
musl succeed on a DC1251renglh saving Ihrow or be knocked
prone. Iflhe largel isprone, lhe panlher can lake abonus
aclion lo make one bile allack againsl il.Armor Class 12
Hil Poinls 13(3d8)
Speed 50fI.,c1imb40fI.CHA
10(+0)WIS
12 (+1)INI
10(+0)CON
13(+1)DEX
15(+2)STR
6 (-2)
Keen Senses. lhe pseudodragon has advanlage on Wisdom
(Perceplion) checks Ihal relyon sighl, hearing, or smell.
Magie Resistanee. lhe pseudodragon has advanlage on saving
Ihrows againsl spells and olher magical effecls.
Limited Te/epathy. lhe pseudodragon can communicale
simpie ideas, emolions, and images lelepalhically wilh any
crealure wilhin 100feel ofillhal can undersland alanguage.
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4lo hil, reach 5ft., one largel.
Hit:4 (ld4 +2) piercing damage.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5fI., one crealure.
Hit:4 (ld4 +2) piercing damage, and lhe largel musl succeed
on a DC11Conslilulion saving Ihrow or become poisoned for
1hour. Ifils saving Ihrow resull is6or lower,lhe largel falls
unconscious forlhe same duralion, or unlil illakes damage or
another creature uses an action to wake it.Skills Perceplion +3, 51eallh+4
Senses blindsighl10 fI.,darkvision 60fI., passive Perceplion 13
Languages underslands Common and Draconic bul doesn'l
speak
Challenge 1/4 (50XP)CHA
7(-2)WIS
14 (+2)INT
3(-4)CON
10(+0)DEX
15 (+2)SIR
14 (+2)
Skills Perceplion +4, 51eallh +6
Senses passive Percepllon 14
Languages-
Challenge 1/4 (50XP)
3
08APPENDlX D ICREATURE STATISTlCS
~UASIT . .
Tinyfiend (demon, shapechanger), chaotlC evll
Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 7 (3d4)
Speed 40 fI. (10 fI., fly40 fI. in bal form;40 fI., c1imb40 fI. in
cenlipede form;40 fI., swim 40 fI. in load form)ACllONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5ft., one targel.
Hit:1 piercing damage.
RAVEN
Tiny beast, unaligned
SlR
5 (-3)DEX
17 (+3)CON
10 (+0)INl
7 (-2)WIS
10 (+0)CHA
10 (+0)Armor Class 12
HitPoints1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 10ft., fly50 fI.
Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages -
Chalienge O(10 XP)Skills Sleallh +5
Damage Resislances cold, fire, lighlning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing fromnonmagical weapons
Damage Immunilies poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 10
Languages Abyssal, Common
Chalienge 1 (200 XP)STR
2(-4)DEX
14 (+2)CON
8 (-1)INT
2 (-4)WIS
12 (+1)CHA
6 (-2)
Shapechanger. lhe quasil can use ils aclion lo polymorph inlo
lhe beasl formof a bal, cenlipede, orload,orinto its demon
formoIts statistics arelhe same in each form,although its
altack is different in some oflhem. Anyequipment itcarries is
not transformed. Ifslain, the quasit revertslo its demon formo
Magic Resislance. lhe quasit has advanlage on saving Ihrows
againsl spells and other magical effects.
ACllONS
Claws (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lo hit,
reach 5ft., one target. Hit:5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage. Ifthe
target is a creature, itmusl succeed on a DC 10 Constitulion
saving throw ortake 5 (2d4) poison damage and become
poisoned for1 minute. lhe crealure can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its tums, ending the effect early
on a success.Mimicry. The raven can mimic simple sounds it has heard,
such as a person whispering, a baby crying, oran animal
chittering. A creaturethat hears the sounds can tell they are
imitations with a successful DC 10Wisdom (Insight) check.
ACTIONS
Beak. Me/ee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5ft., one targel.
Hit:1piercing damage.
REEF SHARK
Medium beost, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
SpeedOfI., swim 40 ft.
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5ft., one arget.
Hit:6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.Pack Tacties. The shark has advantage on altack rolls against a
creatureifat least one of the shark's allies iswithin 5
1feet ofthe
creatureand isn't incapacitated.
Water Breathing. lhe shark can breathe only while u derwater.Skills Perception +2
Sensesblindsight 30 fI., passive Perception 12
Languages -
Challenge 1{2(100 XP)Scare (ljDay). Onecreatureofthe quasit's choice within 20
feet ofit must succeed on a DC 10Wisdom saving throw orbe
frightened for1 minute. lhe target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its tums, with disadvantage ifthe quasit is
within line of sight, ending the effect early on a success.
Invisibility. lhe quasit tums invisible until italtacks oruses
Scare,oruntil its concentration ends. Anything the invisible
quasit is carrying orwearing is invisible as long as it remains in
contact with the quasit.
RAT
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
HitPoints1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 20 fI.STR
14 (+2)DEX
13 (+1)CON
13 (+1)INl
1 (-5)WIS
10 (+0)CHA
4 (-3)
STR
2 (-4)DEX
11 (+0)CON
9 (-1)INT
2 (-4)WIS
10 (+0)CHA
4 (-3)
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge O(10 XP)
Keen Smell. Therathas advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that relyon smell.I
APPENDTX D CRFA1 URE fATISTICS309
ACTIONSHooves, Melee Weapon Attaek: +2 lo hil, reach 5fI., one target.
Hit:8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.RIDING HORSE
Large beast, unaligned
•• ••Shortbow, Ranged Weapon Attaek: +Gto hit, range 40 ft.flGO
fI., one targel. Hit:1 piercing damage. Ifthe target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving
throw or beco me poisoned for 1minute. Ifits saving lhrow
result is 5ar lower, the target falls unconscious for the same
duration, or until it takes damage ar another creature uses an
action to wake it.
Heart Sight. The sprite louches a crealure and knows lhe
creature's current emotional state. Ifthe target fails a DC 10
Charisma saving lhrow, the sprite also knows the creature's
alignment. Celestiais, fiends, and undead automatically fail the
saving throw.
Invisibility, The sprite turns invisible until it attacks or casts
a spell, ar until its concentration ends. Anything the invisible
sprite is carrying ar wearing is invisible as long as itremains in
contact with the sprite.CHA
7(-2)
CHA
5(-3)WIS
8 (-1)WIS
11 (+0)INT
2(-4)
INT
G(-2)CON
12 (+1)
CON
15 (+2)OEX
14 (+2)OEX
10 (+0)STR
1G (+3)
STR
10 (+0)Armor Class 10
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2)
Speed GOfI.
ACTIONS
SKELETON
Medium undead, lawful evilSenses passive Perception 10
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
SPRITE
Tinyfey, neulral good
Armor Class 15 (Ieather armor)
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 10 fI., fly40 ft.Oamage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning
Oamage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision GOft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands languages it knew in life but can't speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)Armor Class 13 (armor scraps)
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4)
Speed 30 fI.
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5ft., one
targel.Hit:5 (ldG + 2) piercing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, range 80 fl./320
ft., one targel. Hit:5 (ldG + 2) piercing damage.
ACTIONS
Longsword, Melee Weapon Atlaek: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
largel.Hit:1slashing damage.Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 (the check is made with
disadvantage ifthe sprite is flying)
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)STR
3(-4)OEX
18 (+4)CON
10 (+0)INT
14 (+2)WIS
13 (+1)CHA
11 (+O)VARIANT: WARHORSE ARMOR
An armored warhorse has an Armar Class based on the
type of barding worn (see chapter 5for more information
on barding). Its Armar Class includes the horse's Dexterity
modifier, where applicable.
ACBarding AC Barding
12 Leather 1G Chain mail
13 Studded leather 17 Splint
14 Ring mail 18 Plate
15 Scale mail•• ••
APPENDIX D ICREATURE STATlSTICS
TIGER
Large beast, una/igned
Armor Class 12
Hil Poinls 37(5d10 +10)
Speed 40fI.
Skills Perceplion +3, Sleallh +6
Senses passive Perceplion 13
Languages -
Challenge 1(200 XP)Skills Perceplion +3, Sleallh +4
Senses passive Perceplion 13
Languages -
Challenge 1/4 (50XP)Armor Class 13(nalural armar) I
Hil Poinls 11(2d8 +2)
Speed 40fI.
--ST-R---O-E-X--C-O-N---IN-T---W-IS--~
_12.(.+1.)_.15.(.+2.)_.12.(.+1.) __ 3_(-_4_) _1_2_(+_1_) _~
IWOLF
Medium beast, una/igned
CHA
8 (-1)WIS
12(+1)INT
3 (-4)CON
14 (+2)OEX
15 (+2)STR
17 (+3)
Keen Smell.The liger has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks lhal relyon smel!.
Pounce.Iflhe liger moves alleasl 20feel slraighlloward a
crealure righl before hilling ilwilh ac1awallack, lhe largel
musl succeed on a DC13Slrenglh saving Ihrow or be knocked
prone. Iflhe largel isprone, lhe liger can lake abonus aclion
lo make one bile allack againsl il.Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolfhas advanlage on isdom
(Perceplion) checks lhal relyon hearing or smel!. I
Pack Tactics. The wolf has advanlage on allack rolls a~ainsl a
crealure ifalleasl one oflhe wolf's allies iswilhin 5fe Iof lhe
crealure and isn'l incapacilaled.
ACTlONS
ACTIONS
Bile. Melee Weapon Attack: +5lo hil, reach 5fI.,one largel.
Hit:8 (ld10 +3) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5lo hil, reach 5fI., one largel.
Hit:7(ld8 + 3)slashing damage.Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lOhil, reach 5ft., one I rgel.
Hit:7 (2d4+ 2)piercing damage. Iflhe largel isacrea ure,
ilmusl succeed on a DC11Slrenglh saving lhrow or lle
knocked prone.
ZOMBIE
Medium undead, neutral evil
WARHORSE
Large beast, unaligned
Armar Class 11
Hil Poinls 19(3d10 +3)
Speed 60fI.Armor Class 8
Hil Poinls 22 (3d8 +9)
Speed 20fI.
STR OEX
13(+1) 6 (-2)CON
16 (+3)INT
3 (-4)WIS
6 (-2)CHA
5 (-3)
Senses passive Perceplion 11
Languages -
Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)STR
18 (+4)OEX
12(+1)CON
13 (+1)INT
2(-4)WIS
12(+1)CHA
7 (-2)Saving Throws Wis+0
Oamage Immunilies poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Senses darkvision 60fI., passive Perceplion 8
Languages underslands lhe languages ilknew inlife uIcan'l
speak
Challenge 1/4 (50XP)
Trampling Charge. Iflhe horse moves alleasl 20feel slraighl
loward acrealure righl before hilling ilwilh ahooves allack,
lhe largel musl succeed on a DC14Slrenglh saving Ihrow ar
be knocked prone. Iflhe largel isprone, lhe horse can lake a
bonus aclion lo make anolher allack wilh ils hooves againsl
lhe largel.
ACTIONS
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lo hil, reach 5fI.,one largel.
Hit:11(2d6 +4) bludgeoning damage.Undead Fortitude. Ifdamage reduces lhe zombre lo OIhil
poinls, ilmusl make aConslilulion saving lhrow wilh a DC
of 5+lhe damage laken, unless lhe damage isradian or
from acrilical hil. On asuccess, lhe zombie drops lo 1hil
poinl inslead.
ACTlONS
Hit:4 (ld6 + 1)bludgeoning damage.
APPENDlX D ICREATURf. S ATISTICS
3
11
ApPENDIX E:INSPIRATIONAL READING
3
12rNSPIRATION FORALLOFTHE FANTASYWORK IHAVE
dane stems directly from the lave my father
showed when I was a lad, for he spent many
hours telling mestories he made up as he went
along, tales of cloaked old men who could grant
wishes, of magic rings and enchanted swords,
ar wicked sorcerers and dauntless swordsmen ..
. .A11of us tend to get ample helpings of fantasy
when we are very young, fram fairy tales such as those
written by the Brathers Grimm and Andrew Lang.
This often leads to reading books of mythology. paging
thraugh bestiaries, and consultation of compilations
of the myths of various lands and peoples. Upon such
a baseJbuilt my interest in fantasy. being an avid
reader of a11science fiction and fantasy literature
since 1950. The fo11owing authors were ofparticular
inspiration to me.
-E. Gary Gygax, Oungeon Master's Guide (1979)
Agreal deal offanlasy lileralure has been published
since lhe co.crealor ofOUNGEONS &ORAGONSwrote
lhose words, including breakthrough works seI in lhe
shared worlds of0&0. The following lisl includes
Gary's originallisl and some addilional works lhal have
inspired lhe game's designers in lhe years since.
Ahmed, Saladin. Throneofthe Crescent Moon.
Alexander, L1oyd. The Book ofThree and lherest ofthe
Chronicles af Prydain series.
Anderson, Paul. The Broken Sword, The High Crusade, and
Three Hearts and Three Lions.
Anthony,Piers. Split Infinity and therest oftheApprentice
Adeptseries.
Augusta, LadyGregory. Gods and Fighting Men.
Bear,Elizabeth. Range ofGhosts and therest ofthe
Eternal Skytrilogy.
Bellairs,john. The Face in the Frost.
Brackett, Leigh. The BestofLeigh Brackett, The Long
Tomorrow,andThe SwordofRhiannon.
Brooks, Terry. The SwordofShannaraand theresl ofthe
Shannara noveis.
Brown, Fredric. HaJlofMirrorsandWhat Mad Universe.
Bulfinch,Thomas. Bulfinch's Mythology.
Burroughs, Edgar Rice. At the Earth's Core andtherest
ofthe Pellucidar series, Pirates ofVenus and therest of
lheVenusseries, and A PrincessofMarsandthe rest of
the Mars series.
Carter, Lin. WarriorofWorlds End and therest ofthe
World's Endseries.
Cook,Glen. The Black Company and therest ofthe Black
Company series.
deCamp, L.Sprague. The FaJJibleFiend andLest
Darkness FaJl.
deCamp, L.Sprague &Fletcher Pratt. The Compleat
Enchanterand therest oftheHarold Shea series, and
Carnelian Cube.
Derleth, August and H.P.Lovecraft. Watchers out ofTime.
Dunsany, Lord. The Book ofWonder, The Essential Lord
Dunsany CoJlection, The Gods ofPegana, The King of
Elfland's Daughter, Lord Dunsany Compendium, andThe
SwordofWeJleran and Other Tales.
APPENDIX E IINSPIRATIONAL READINGFarmer, Philipjose. MakerofUniverses and lherest ofthe
WorldofTiers series.
Fax,Gardner. Kothar and the Conjurer's Curse and therest of
the Kolhar series, and Kyrik and the Lost Queen andtherest
ofthe Kyrikseries.
Froud, Brian &AlanLee. Faeries.
Hickman, Tracy &Margarel Weis. DragonsofAutumn TwiJight
and lherest oftheChronicles Trilogy.
Hodgson, William Hope. The Night Land.
Howard, Robert E. The Coming ofConan the Cimmerian and
the rest af the Canan series.
jemisin, N.K. The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms and the
rest ofthe lnheritance series, The Killing Moon, andThe
Shadowed Sun.
Jordan, Robert. The Eye of the World and therest oftheWheel
af Time series.
Kay,GuyGavriel. Tigana.
King,Stephen. The Eyes ofthe Dragon.
Lanier, Sterling. Hiero'sjourney andThe Unforsaken Hiero.
LeGuin, Ursula. A WizardofEarthseaandtherest ofthe
Earthsea series.
Leiber, Fritz. Swords and Deviltry and therest ofthe Fafhrd &
Gray Mouser series.
Lovecraft, H.P. The Complete Works.
Lynch,Scott. The LiesofLocke Lamora andthe rest ofthe
Gentlemen Bastard series.
Martin, George RR. A Game ofThrones andtheres! ofthe
Song ofIceand Fire series.
McKillip.Patricia. The Forgotten Beasts ofEld.
Merritt, A. Creep, Shadow, Creep; DweJlers in the Mirage; and
The Moon Pool.
Miéville,China. Perdido Street Station and theother
Bas-Lag novels.
Moorcock, Michael. ElricofMelnibonéand therest ofthe
Elricseries, and Thejewel in the SkuJl and lherest ofthe
Hawkmoon series.
Norton, Andre. Quag KeepandWitch World.
Offutt,AndrewJ.,ed. Swords against Darkness fll.
Peake, Mervyn. Titos Groan and therest ofthe
Gormenghast series.
Pratchelt, Terry. The ColourofMagic andlherest ofthe
Discworld series.
Pratt, Fletcher. Blue Star.
Rothfuss, Patrick. The Name ofthe Wind andtherest ofthe
Kingkiller series.
Saberhagen, Fred. The Broken Lands andChangeling EartiJ.
Salvatore, RA. The Crystal Shard andtheresl ofThe
Legend ofDrizzt.
Sanderson, Brandon. Mistborn and therest ofthe
Mislborn trilogy.
Smith, ClarkAshlon. The Return ofthe Sorcerer.
SI.Clair,Margaret. Change the Sky and Other Stories, The
Shadow People, andSign ofthe Labrys.
Tolkien,j.R.R The Hobbit, The Lord ofthe Rings. andThe
Silmarillion.
Tolstoy,Nikolai. The Coming ofthe King.
Vance,jack. The Dying Earth andThe Eyes ofthe Overworld.
Weinbaum, Stanley. VaJlcyofDrcamsandThe WorldsofIr.
Wellman, ManlyWade. The Golgotha Dancers.
Williamson,jack. The Cosmic Express andThe Pygmy Planet.
Wolfe,Gene. The Shadowofthe Torturer and therest ofThe
BookoftheNewSun.
Zelazny, Roger.jackofShadowsandNine Princes in Amber
and therest oftheAmber series.
INDEX
ohitpoints.5eehítpoints:
dropping to o
abilitycheek, 7, 12, 173-179, 186
contest, 174
graup,175
passive, 175
skill,174-175
skills with different abilities
(variant), 175
working together, 175
ability modifier, 7, 13. 173
determining, 13, 173
table. 13, 173
ability seore, 7, 12-13, 173
custornizing (variant), 13
determining, 12-13
increase. See under racial traits
paint cosi lable, 13
rolling,13
slandard sei, 13
summary, 12, 173
using, 173-179
AbilitySeore Improvement. See
specifrc ,Iou entries
abjuration, l' 5, 203
5chool (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
Abjuration Savan! (wizard), 115
Abjure Enemy (paladin). Set
underChannel Divinity paladin
options
abjurer, 115
Abyss. lhe. Seeplanes af existente
Abyssal.Seelanguage
AC.SeeArmor Class
Acheron. Seeplanes of existenee
acid damage. Seedamage types
acolyte.See under background
Aeolyte ofNature (elerie), 62
Aerobaties (skill). See under
Dexterity
aetion, 189, 192-193
Attack aetion, 192
east a spell. Seeeasting a spell:
easting time
Dash action, 192
Disengage aetion, 192
Dodge aetion, 192
Help aetion, 192
Hide aetion, 192
improvising, 193
Ready aetion, 193
Search action, 193
Use an Objeet aetion, 193
Aetion Surge (fighter), 72
advancement. Seeundereharacter
advantage, 7, 173
adventure, 5, 7-8
See also adventuring
adventurer. Seecharaeter
adventuring, 181-187
adventuring gear, 148, 150-153
table, 150
age (eharacter). See specific roce
entries
Agonizing Blast (warloek). See
eldritch invocatians
aHgnment, 122
of planes. Seeplanes of
existence: alignment of
Alter Memories (wizard), 117
ammunition (weapon property).
Seeweapon praperties
Animal Handling (skill). See undu
Wisdom
Aquan.Seelanguage
Arborea. Seeplanes of existence
Arcadia.Seeplanes of existenee
Arcana (skill). See under
Intelligenee
Areane Charge (fighter), 75
areane magic, 205
See also bard; martial
arehetypes: Eldritch Knight;
roguish arehetypes: Areane
Trickster; sorcerer; warlock;
wizard
Arcane Reeovery (wizard), 115
Arcane Tradition (wizard), 115
arcane traditions, 115-119
School of Abjuration, 115-116
School ofConjuration, 116
Sehool of Divination, 116-117
Sehool of Enehantment, 117
Sehool of Evoeation, 117-118
School af llIusion, 118
Sehool ofNecromancy, 118-
119
Sehool ofTransmutation, 119
Areane Trickster (rogue). Su unda
roguish archetypes
ArcaneWard (wizard), 115
Archdruid (druid), 67-68Archery.See under fighting styles
Archfey, the (warlock). See under
otherworldly patrons
area of effect, 204-205
armor and shields, 144-146
barding, 155, 310
casting a spell in. Seecasting a
spell: in armor
getting into and out of, 146
Stealth. 144
table, 145
ArmorClass (AC), 7, 14, 144, 177
ArmorofShadows (warlock). See
eldriteh invocations
armor proficiency, 144
See olso specific c1QSSentries
Artificer's Lore (rock gnome), 37
Ascendant Step (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Aspect of the Beasl (barbarian),
50
Assassin (rogue). See wnder
roguish archetypes
Assassinate (rogue), 97
Astral Plane. Seeplanes of
existence
Athletics (skill). See under
Strength
attack of opportunity. See
opportunity attack
attack, H,193-196
Attack aetion. See under action
attack modifier, 14, 194
spell.See specific Spel/eosting
entries
attack reli, 7. 14, 176, 177, 194
ability modifier, 194
Dexterity-based, 177, 194
modifiers to, 194
proficiency bonus, 194
rolling a 1, 194
rolling a 20, 194
spell.Seespell attack roll
Strength.based, 176, 194
Auran.Seelanguage
Aura of Courage (paladin). 85
Aura of Devotion (paladin), 86
Aura of Proleetion (paladin), 85
Aura ofWarding (paladin), 87
automatic hit. Seeattack reli:
rolling a 20
automatic miss. Seeattack rell:
rolling a 1
Avatar of Battle (elerie), 63
Avenging Angel (paladin), 88
Awakened Mind (warlock), 1lO
background, 11, 12, 1]-14,
125-141
acolyte, 127
charlatan, 128
criminal. 129-130
eustomizing, 125-126
enlertainer, 130-131
equipment, 125
folk hero, 131-132
gladiator (variant), 131
guild artisan, 132-133
guild merchant (variant), 133
hermit, 134-135
languages. 125
noble, 135-136
noble knight (varianl), 136
outlander, 136-137
pirate (variant), 139
proficiencies, 125
sage, 137-138
sailor, 139
soldier, 140--141
spy (variant), 130
suggested characteristies, 125
urehin,141
Bad Reputation (pirate variant],
139
barbarian, 45, 46-50
primai paths. Seeprimai paths
quick build, 47
bard, 45, 51-55
eolleges. Seebard eolleges
quick build, 52
spelllist, 207
Bard College (bard), 54
bard colleges, 54-55
Col1ege of Lore, 54-55
College ofValor, 55
Bardie Inspiration (bard), 53-54
barding.Seeunder armor and
shields
base aUack bonus. Seeproficiency
bonus
base save bonus. Seeproficiency
bonus
bat.Seecreature slatistics
Baule Magic (bard), 55
Battle Master (fighter). See wnder
martial archetypesbear, bfack. Seecreature statisties
bear, brown. Seecreature statistics
Beastlands, lhe. Seeplanes of
existence
Beast Master (ranger). See under
ranger archetypes
Beast Speech (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Beast Spells (druid), 67
Beguiling Defenses (warlock), 109
Beguiling Influence (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Bend Luek (sorcerer), 103
Benign Transposition (wizard), 116
Bestial Fury (ranger), 93
Bewitching Whispers (warlock).
Seeeldriteh invocalions
Blessed Healer (e1erie), 60
Blessings ofKnowledge (e1erie), 59
Blessing ofthe Trickster (c1eric), 63
blinded.Seeconditions
Blindsense (rogue), 96
blindsignt, 183
bludgeoning damage. Seedamage
types
boar.Seecreature statistics
bonds.Seepersonality
bonus, 7
bonus aetion, 189
See olso easting a spell; casting
time
Book of Ancient Seerets (warlock).
Seeeldriteh invocations
Book ofSnadows (warlock), 108
Border Etnereal. Seeplanes of
existence
Brave (haIAing), 28
breaking concentration. See
concentration
Breath ofWinter (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
Breath Weapon (dragonborn), 34
bright Iignt. Seelight
bringing back the dead. See under
dead
Brutal CriticaI (barbarian), 49
buli rush. Seeshoving
By Popular Demand (entertainer),
130
Bytopia.Seeplanes of existence
Calishite. Seehuman ethnieities
campaign, 5, 6
cantrips, 201
See Q/so Spel1casting: bard;
c1eric; druid; fighter, Eldritch
Knight; rogue, Areane Trickster;
sorcerer; warlock; wizard
Carceri.Seeplanes of existence
Careful Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
carrying capacity. See wnder Iifting
and earrying
casting a spell, 201-205
area of effect, 204-205
at a higher levei, 201
attack rolt, 205
casting time, 202
eombining effeets, 205
components, 203
duration, 203-204
in armor, 201
range, 202-203
saving throw, 205
targeting, 204
See Q/so specific SpellcQsting
entries
casting time. See under casting
a spell
eat.Seecreature statistics
Celestial. Seelanguage
centipede, giant. Seecreature
statistics
Cnains of Carceri (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Champion (fighter). See under
martial arcnetypes
Channel Oivinity (eleric), 58-59
multielassing ando See under
multielassing
(paladin),85
Seeolso Channel Divinity eleric
options; Channel Divinity
paladin options
Channel Divinity eleric options,
59-63
Charm Animais and Plants
(Nature Domain), 62
Cloak ofShadows (Triekery
doma in), 63
Destroy Undead, 59
Destructive Wrath (Tempest
domain),62
Guided Strike (War domain). 63
lnvoke Duplieity (Triekery
domain),63Knowledge ofthe Ages
(Knowledge domain), 59
Preserve Ufe (Ufe domain), 60
Radianee oflne Dawn (Ught
domain),61
Read Thougnls (Knowledge
domain),59-60
Turn Undead, 59
War God's Blessing (War
doma in), 63
Channel Divinity paladin options,
86-88
Abjure Enemy (Oath of
Vengeance),88
Nalure's Wrath (Oath ofthe
Ancients),87
Saered Weapon (Oath of
Devotion).86
Turn the Faithless (Oatll of the
Ancients),87
Turn the Unholy (Oath of
Devotion),86
Vow of Enmity (Oatn of
Vengeance),88
chaotic evil. Seealignment
chaotic goOO. Seealignment
chaotic neutral. Seealignment
character, 5,11-15
advancement, 15
age.See speeific rQceentries
alignment. Seealignment
crealing a, 11-15
deseribing your, 13-14
equipping your, 14, 125,
143-157
height and weight, 121
name, 121. See 0/$0 speeific roce
entries
personality. Seepersonality
sex and gender, 121
charaeter sheet, 11, 317-319
Charisma, 12, 178-179
checks, 178-179
Deception, 178
Intimidation, 179
Performance, 179
Persuasion, 179
eharlatan. See under background
Charm Animais and plants
(elerie).See under Channel
Divinity elerie options
eharmed. Seeconditions
eheck.Seeability cneck
Chondathan. Seehuman
ethnicities
Cirele Forms (druid), 69
(irele ofthe Land (druid). See
underdruid cireles
(irele ohhe Moon (druid). See
underdruid circles
Cirele Spells (druid). 68
Cily Seerets (urchin), 141
Cleansing Touch (pafadin), 85
Cloak ofShadows (eleric). See
wnder Channel Divinity eleric
options
{monk),80
c1ass,11,45
choosing a, 11
features, 11, 15
proficiencies, 12
quick build, 11
See o/so $peeific closs en/ries
c1ear path to the target. See
casting a spel1: targeting
Clench ofthe North Wind (monk).
SeeElemental Disciplines
eleric, 45, 56-63
divine domains. Seedivine
domains
quick build, 57
spelllist, 207-208
climbing. See under movement
coinage, 143
cold damage. Seedamage types
College ofLore (bard). See undu
bard colleges
College ofValor (bard). See under
bard colleges
Colossus Slayer (ranger). See
Hunter's Prey
combat, 8, '&9-198
mounted,198
stepbystep, 189
underwater, 198
Comhat lnspiration (bard), 55
eombat round. Seetime: round
Combat Superiority (fighter), 73
Combat Wild Shape (druid), 69
combining spell effects. See
casting a spell: combining
effects
Commander's Strike maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
Common. Seelanguage~="~:~;l.,.,,'
eomponent, spell.SIcasting a
spell: component
Seea/so material pell
eomponent; som tie spell
component; verb I spell
component
concentration, 203-104
conditions, 290-2921
cone.Seearea of elfect
conjuration, 116, 20l
school (wizard). ee under
arcane tradilions
canjur.ation Savant 'Hizard),116
conjurer, 116
Constltution, 12, 17
c~ecks, 177 I
hlt points ando S~ h.it points
conlainer capacity, 1.p3
contes!.See under abillty eheek
Controlled Chaos (strcerer), 103
Converting a spell si t to sorcery
points (sorcerer). SeeFont
of Magic
eopper pieee (cp) S eeoinage
Corona of Light (ele c),61
Countercharm (bard , 54
eover, 196
crafting.Seedowntite activíty
crawling. See under ovement
Create Thrall (warlo k), 110
creating a character. See under
character I
creating spell slots (torcerer). See
Font of Magic ,
creature statistics, 304-311
criminal. See under ackground
Criminal Contact (c minal),129
~~~~~.a~i~~~'S~~6crea~re statistics
cube.Seearea of e et
Cunning Action (ro e). 96
eurrent hit points. S ehit poinls:
current
Cuttmg Words (bar ,54-55
cylinder.Seearea af ffect
damage, 14, 196-197
at O hit points. ste underdeath
saving throws
damage resistance, 97
Damage Resistance (dragonborn),
34
damageroll, 14, 17,177,196
Dexterity-based, 77
spell, 196
Strength-based, 76
more than one t rget, 196
weapon, 14, 196
damage types, 196
damage vulnerabili ,197
Damaran. Seehum n ethnicities
Dampen Elements leric),62
Danger Sense (bar rian),48
Dark Delirium (war ck),109
dark elf.Seeelf
darkness. Seelighl
Dark One's Blessin (warlock),109
Dark One's Own L k (warlock),
109
darkvision, 183, 18
See o/so speeific ce entries
Dash aetion. SeeWlUaction
De.SeeDifficulty C ss
dead,197
bringing back th . See thespell
descriptionsfor aise dead,
reinearnate, res rredion,
revivify, true res rrection
deafened. Seecond tions
death,197
instant, 197
monsters and, 1
Death domain, 293
death saving throw ,197
damage at O hit oints, 197
rolling a 1 or 20 n,197
Death Strike (rogu ,97
Deception (skill). S e under
Charisma
deep gnome. Seegome
Deep Speech. SeeI nguage
Defense. Seeunder ghting styles
Defensive Tacties { nger),93
DeAect Missiles ( nk), 78
dehydration. Seefo d and drink:
water requirem nts
deities, 293-299
Celtie, 297, 298
Dragonlance,2 3, 295
Eberron, 293, 2 6
Egyptian, 297- 8, 299
Forgotten Real s, 293, 294
Greek, 297, 298
Greyhawk, 293, 95
1 'OEX
3
13
nonhuman, 293, 296
Norse, 298, 299
See a/so e1eric; druid; paladin
demiplanes. Seeplanes of
existence
Destroy Undead. See under
Channel Divinity e1eric options
Destruetive Wrath (e1erie). See
underChannel Divinity e1eric
options
Devil's Sight (warloek). Su
eldriteh invocations
Dexterity. 12, 176-177
Acrobatics, 176
checks, 176-177
Sleight ofHand, 177
Stealth, 177
Diamond Soul (monk), 79
d (abbreviation). Seedice
dice, 6-7
d20rd3,7
percentile,6
difficult terrain. See under
movement
Difficulty Class (DC), 7, 174
typical DCs table, 174
dim light. Seelighl
disadvantage, 7, 173
Disarming Attack maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
Disciple oflife (e1eric), 60
Disciple ofthe Elements (monk).
80
Discovery (hermit), 134
Disengage action. See under action
Distant Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Distracting Strike maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
divination, 116-117,203
school (wizard). See under
areane traditions
Divination Savant (wizard), 116
Divine Domain (deric), 58
doma in spells, 58
divine domains, 59
Knowledge, 59-60
life, 60
light,60-61
Nature, 61-62
Tempest,62
Trickery, 62-63
War, 63
Divine Health (paladin), 85
Divine Intervention (c1eric), 59
divine magic, 205
Seeo/so cleric; druid; paladin;
ranger
diviner,116
Divine Sense (paladin), 84
Divine Smite (paladin), 85
Divine Strike (e1eric, life domain),
60
(e1erie, Tempest domain), 62
(e1erie, Trickery domain), 63
(e1eric. War domain), 63
DM.SeeDungeon Master
Dodge action. See under action
doma in spells. See under Divine
Domain
donning and doffing armar. See
armor and shields: getting into
and out of
downtime activities, 187
draconians, 34
Draconic, 34
alphabet, 124
Seeo/so language
Draconic Ancestry (dragonborn),
3'
Draconic Presence (sorcerer), 102
Draconic Resilience (sorcerer), 102
Dragon Ancestor (sorcerer), 102
dragonborn, 32-34
dragonborn names, 33-34
dragonborn traits, 34
Dragon Wings (sorcerer), 103
draw or sheathe a weapon. See
objects: using during combat
Dreadful Word (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
drink (expenses). 158
drop an object. Seeobjects: using
during combat
drow.Seeelf
Drow Magic, 24
druid, 45. 64-69
druid cireles. See druid cireles
quick build, 65
spelllist. 208
Druid Cirele, 67
druid cireles, 68-69
Cirele ofthe land, 68-69
Cirele ofthe Moon, 69
Druidic,66
INDEXdruidicfocus, 150. 151
See 0150 spellcasting focus:
druid
druids ilnd the gods, 69
Dueling.See under fighting styles
duergar.Seedwarf
Dungeon Master (DM), 5
Durable Summons (wizard), 116
duration. Seeunducasting a spell
dwarf, 1&-20
dwarf names, 20
dwarf traits, 20
Owarven Armor Training
(mountain dwarf), 20
Owarven Combat Training, 20
Dwarven Resilience, 20
Dwarven Toughness (hill dwarf),
20
Owarvish, 20
alphabet, 122
See O/50 language
effect, 201
Elder Champion (paladin), 87
Eldritch Invocations (warlock), 107
eldritch invocations. 110--111
Eldritch Knight (fighter). See undu
martial archetypes
Eldritch Master (warlock), 108
Eldritch Sight (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Eldritch Spear (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Eldritch Strike (fighter), 75
electrum piece (ep). Seecoinage
Elemental Affinity (sorcerer), 103
Elemental AUunement (monk).
SeeElemental Disciplines
Elemental Chaos. Seeplanes of
existence
Elemental Disciplines (monk), 81
Elemental Planes. Seeplanes of
existence
Elemental wild Shape (druid), 69
elf,21-24
elf names, 22-23
elftraits, 23-24
ElfWeapon Training, 23, 24
Elusive (rogue), 96
Elvish, 23
alphabet, 123
See a/so language
Elysium.Seeplanes of existence
Empowered Evocation (wizard),
117
Empowered Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Empty Body (monk), 79
encnantment, 117, 203
sehool (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
Enchantment Savant (wizard), 117
enchanter, 117
encounters. See under travei
encumbrance. See under lifting
and carrying
entertainer. See under backgrollnd
Entropic Ward (warlock). 110
environment, 183-185
equipment, 14, 125. 143-161
background,125
packs, 151
size (variant), 144
starting, 143
See 0150 adventuring gear;
armor and shields: tools;
mounts and vehieles; weapon;
ond specifie boelc.ground entries
under boelc.grounds
equipment packs. See under
equipment
See 0150speeifie c/ou entries:
quick build
Escape the Horde (ranger). See
Defensive Tactics
escaping a grapple, 195
Eternal Mountain Defense
(monk).SeeElemental
Disciplines
Ethereal Plane. Seeplanes of
existence
Evasion (monk), 79
(ranger). SeeSuperior Hunter's
Defense
(rogue),96
Evasive Footwork maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
evocation, 117-118,203
school (wizard). See undu
arcane traditions
Evocation Savant (wizard), 117
evoker, 117
Exceptional Training (ranger), 93
exception-based rules. See under
rules
exhaustion, 181, 185, 291exotic language. Seelanguage
expenses. 157-158, 187
experience points (XP). 15
multielassing and. See /)nder
multiclassing
Expert Divination (wizard), 116
Expertise (bard), 54
(rogue),96
exploration, 8
Extended Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Extra Attack (barbarian), 49
(bard), 55
(fighter), 72
(monk),79
{paladin),85
{ranger),92
Eyes ofthe Rune Keeper (warlock).
Seeeldritch invocations
Faerie.Suplanes of existence:
Feywild, the
falling, 183
False Identity (charlatan), 128
familiar (warlock), 107
Fangs ofthe Fire Snake (monk).
SeeElemental Disciplines
Far Realm. Seeplanes of existence
Fast Hands (rogue), 97
Fast Movement (barbarian), 49
Favored Enemy (ranger), 91
feats, 165-170
gaining, 165
prerequisites, 165
Feinting Attack maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
Ferallnstinct (barbarian), 49
Feral Senses (ranger), 92
FeyAncestry (elf) , 23
(h,lf-eI0. 39
Fey Presence (warlock). 108
Feywild, the. Seeplanes of
existence
Fiendish Resilience (warlock), 109
Fiendish Vigor (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Fiend, the (warlock). See /)nder
otherworldly patrons
fighter, 45, 70-75
martial archetypes. Seemartial
archetypes
quick build, 71
Fighting Style (fighter), 72
(paladin),84
{ranger),91
fighting styles, 72,84,91
Archery, 72, 91
Defense, 72, 84, 91
Dueling, 72, 84, 91
Great Weapon Fighting, 72, 84
Protection, 72, 84
Two-Weapon Fighting, 72, 91
finding a hidden creature, 177
finding a hidden object. 178
finesse (weapon property). See
weapon properties
fire damage. Seedamage types
Fist of Four Thunders (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
Fist of Unbroken Air (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
Flames ofthe phoenix (monk).
SeeElemental Disciplines
flaws.Seepersonality
Fleet of Foot (wood elf), 24
Flexible Casting (sorcerer). See
Font of Magic
Flurry of Blows (monk). SeeKi
flying.See /)nder movement
Focused Conjuration (wizard), 116
Foe Slayer (ranger), 92
folk hero. See under background
Font of Inspiration (bard), 54
Font of Magic (sorcerer). 101
food and drink, 158, 185
expenses, 158
food requirements, 185
water requirements, 185
foraging. See under traveI
force damage. Seedamage types
forced march. See under
movement
forest gnome. Seegnome
Frenzy (barbarian), 49
frigntened. Seeconditions
frog.Seecreature statistics
gaining a levei, 15
Gargantuan. Seesize category
Gaze ofTwo Minds (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Gehenna. Seeplanes of existence
gender.Seecharacter: sex and
gender
getting into and out of armor. See
unduarmor and shields
Giant.SeelanguageGiant Kilter (ranger). SeeHunter's
Prey
gladiator. See under background
gnome, 35-37
Gnome Cunning (gnome), 37
gnome names, 36
gnome traits, 36-37
Gnomish,37
Seelanguage
Goading Attack maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
gold dwarf. Seedwarf
gold piece (gp), 14
See also coinage
Gong ofthe Summit (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
grappled. Seeconditions
grappling, 195
gray dwarf. Seedwarf
Greater Portent (wizard), 117
Great Old One, the (warlock). See
underotherworldly patrons
Great Weapon Fighting. See under
fighting styles
Great Wheel, the. Seeplanes of
existence
grid (variant), 192
Grim Harvest (wizard), 118
group checks. See under ability
check
Guided Strike (eleric). See under
Channel Divinity e1eric options
guild artisan. See under
background
Guild Membership (guild artisan),
1lJ
guild merchant. See under
baekground
Hades.Seeplanes of existence
half cover. Seecover
half-elf, 38-39
nalr-elf names, 39
half-elftraits,39
halAing, 26-28
HalAing (language), 28
See 0150 language
halAing names. 27
Halfling Nimbleness, 28
halAing traits, 28
half-orc,4Q--41
halr-orc names, 41
half-orc traits, 41
hawk.Seecreature statistics
healing, 197
hearing.SeeWisdom: Perception
See O/50 conditions
heavily obscured, 183
heavy (weapon property). See
weapon properties
heavy armor. Seearmor and
shields
See a/50 movement: in heavy
armor
heavy weapons and Small
creatures, 147
height and weight. See under
character
Heightened Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Hellish Resistance (tiefling), 43
Help action. See under action
hermit.See under background
hidden, 177, 178
See a/50 Dexterity: Stealth;
finding a hidden creature;
finding a hidden object; hiding;
unseen attackers and targets
Hide action. See under action
Hide in Plain Sight (ranger), 92
hiding, 177
hign elf.Seeelf
hill dwarf. Seedwarf
hirelings, 159
History (skill). See under
Intel1igence
Hit Dice, 12
multielassing ando See under
multielassing
See also speeifie c/oss entries
hit point maximum, 12, 15, 177
hit pOints, 12, 13, 15, 177,
196-198
Constitution and, 177
current, 196
damage at O. See under death
saving throws
droppingtoO, 197-198
increasing with leveI, 15
multiclassing ando See under
multielassing
starting. 12, 13
subtracting damage from, 196
temporary.198
holding breath. Seesuffocating
Holy Nimbus (paladin), 86holy symbol. SeeSpellcasting:
eleric; paladin
Horde Breaker (ranger). See
Hunter's Prey
Morse, riding. Seecreature
statistics
See 0150 mounts and vehieles
how to play. See under rules
Huge.Seesize category
human, 29-31
human ethnicities, 30--31
human names, 30, 31
human traits, 31
variant,31
Hunter (ranger). See /)nder ranger
archetypes
Hunter's Prey (ranger), 93
Hurl Through Hell (warlock), 109
hustle.Seeaction: Dash action
Hypnotic Gaze (wizard), 117
ideais.Seepersonality
Ignan.Seelanguage
illusion, 118, 203
school (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
illusionist, 118
IIlusion Savant (wizard), 118
IIluskan.Seenuman ethnicilies
IlIusory Reality (wizard), 118
lllusory Self (wizard), 118
imp.Seecreature statistics
Impostor (rogue). 97
Improved Abjuration (wizard), 115
Improved Combat Superiority
(fighter), 74
Improved Criticai (fighter), 72
Improved Divine Smite (paladin),
85
Improved Duplicity (eleric), 63
Improved Fiare (e1eric), 61
Improved Minor Illusion (wizard),
118
lmproved War Magic (fighter), 75
improvised weapons. See under
weapon
incapacitated. Seeconditions
Indomitable (fighter), 72
Indomitable Might (barbarian), 49
Infernal.Seelanguage
Infernallegacy (tietling), 43
Infiltration Expertise (rogue), 97
initiative, 177, 189
Inner Planes. Seeplanes of
existence
Insight (skill). Ser:underWisdom
inspiration, 125
instantaneous (spell duration), 203
Instinctive Charm (wizard), 117
Intelligence, 12, 177-178
Arcana, 177
checks, 177-178
History, 177-178
Investigation, 178
Nature, 178
Religion, 178
Intimidating Presence (barbarian),
49-50
Intimidation (skill). See under
Charisma
Inure<! to Undeath (wizard), 119
Investigation (skill). See under
lntelligence
invisible. Seeconditions
See a/50 unseen attackers and
targets
Invoke Duplícity (deric). See under
Channel Divinity e1eric options
Jack of Ali Trades (bard), 54
jumping. See under movement
Keen Senses (elf), 23
Ki (monk), 78
saving throws, 78
Ki.Empowered Strikes (monk), 79
ki points, 78
spells and, 80
knighí.Seebackground: noble
knight
knocking a creature out, 198
KnowYour Enemy (fighter), 73-74
Knowledge domain (e1eric). See
underdivine domains
Knowledge ofthe Ages (e1eric).
See under Channel Divinity
eleric options
land's Stride (druid), 69
(ranger),92
language, 17, 123, 125
Druidic.SeeDruidic
thieves' can!. Seethieves' cant
large.Seesize category
lawful evil. Seealignment
lawful good. Seealignment
lawful neutral. Seealignment
lay on Hands (paladin), 84
learning spells. See specifie
e (monk).
iplines,Spe/lco~ting entrie5
lethal damage. Seedamage
levei, 11, 15
life domain (deric). See under
divine domains
lifedrinker (warlock). Seeeldrilch
invocations
lifestyle.Seee.penses
lifting and carrying, 176
carrying capacity, 176
encumbrance (variant), 176
size and, 176
lighl,183
light (weapon property). See
weapon properties
light armor. Seearmor and shields
light domain (c1eric). See under
divine domains
lightly obscured, 183
lightning damage. Seedamage
types
limbo.Seeplanes of e.istence
line.Seearea of effect
line of sighl. Seecasting a spelJ:
targeting
Iion.Seeerealure statisties
listening. SeeWisdom: Pereeption
Ste a/ro eonditions
loading (weapon property). See
weapon properties
lock, opening or pieking. See
thieves' tools
lodging (expenses), 158
lolth, 24, 296
long resto Seeresting
lower Planes. Seeplanes of
existenee
low.light vision. Seedarkvision
lueky (halfling), 28
lunging Attack maneuver
(fighler). Seemaneuvers
Mage Hand legerdemain
(rogue),98
Magical Ambush (rogue), 98
Magical Seerets (bard), 54
magic, 8, 201-289
See a/so specific c1assentries
magic item. See underwealth
magic-user. Seewizard
See 0150 arcane magie
Malleable lIIusions (wizard), 118
maneuver (fighter), 73
Maneuvering Attaek maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
maneuvers, 73, 74
list, 74
saving throws, 73
mapping. See under travei
marching order. See tmder travei
Martial Archetype (fighter), 72
martial archetypes, 72-75
Battle Master, 73-74
Champion, 72-73
Eldritch Knight, 74-75
Martial Arts (monk), 78
martial weapon. Seeweapon
categories
Mask of Many Faces (warloek).
Seeeldritch invocations
Mask oflheWild (wood eU), 24
Masler of Myriad Forms
(warloek). Seeeldriteh
invoealions
Master of Nature (c1erie), 62
Master Transmuter (wizard), 119
mastiff.Seeereature statistics
See 0150 mounts and vehicles
material spell component, 203
Material Plane. Seeplanes of
existenee
Mechanus. Seeplanes of existenee
Medicine (skilt). See under
Wisdom
Medium. Seesize category
medium armor. Seearmor and
shields
melee attaek, 195
unarmed,195
with a weapon that requires
ammunition, 147
reach,195
melee weapon, 14, 146, 149, 195
Menacing (half-orc), 41
Menacing Attack maneuver
(fighler). Seemaneuvers
Metamagie (soreerer), 101-102
Military Rank (soldier), 140
Mindless Rage (barbarian), 49
Minions ofChaos (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Minor Alchemy (wizard), 119
Minor Conjuration (wizard), 116
Mire lhe Mind (warloek). See
eldritch invocations
Mist Stanee (monk). SeeElemental Disciplines
Misty Escape (warlock), 109
Misty Visions (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
modifier,7
ability, 7
bonus, 7
penalty, 7
monastic orders, 81
Monastic Tradition (monk), 78
monastic traditions, 79-81
Way of the Open Hand, 79-80
Way of Shadow, 80
Way of the Four Elements,
80-81
monk, 45,76-81
monastic traditions. See
monastie lraditioos
quick build, 77
monk weapons, 78
moon elf. Seeelf
mount.Seemounts and vehicles
mountain dwarf. Seedwarf
Mount Celestia. Seeplanes of
existence
mounted combal. See under
combat
mounts and vehicles, 155, 157
Seea/rounder movement
move aelion. Seemovement
movement, 181-183, 190--192
around ereatures, 191
breaking up, 190
dimbing, 182, 190
crawling, 182, 191
combat, 190-192
difficult terrain, 182, 190
flying, 191
prone, 190-191
forced march, 181
in heavy armor, 144
jumping, 182, 190
mounts and vehicles, 181-182
size, 191-192
speed, 14, 17, 181
squeezing, 192
sland up, 190-191
swimming, 182, 190
travei pace, 181
using diFferent speeds, 190
moving a grappled creature, 195
Mulan.Seehuman ethnicities
mule.Seecreature statistics
Multiattack (ranger), 93
Multiattack Defense (ranger). See
Defensive Tactics
multiclassing, 163-164
Channet Divinity, 164
e.perience points, 163
hit points and Hit Dice, 163
Pact Magic, 16-4
prerequisites, 163
proficiencies, 163-164
proficieney bonus, 163
spell slots, 164
Spcllcasting, 164
speJls known and prepared, 164
Unarmored Defense, 164
multiverse, 5-6, 293, 300
Mystic Arcanum (warloek), 108
name.See under character
Natural Explorer (ranger), 91
Naturallllusionist (forest gnome),
J7
Naturally Stealthy {Iightfoot
halfling),28
Natural Recovery (druid), 68
Nalure (skill). See under
Intelligence
Nature domain (cleric). See under
divine domains
Nature's Sanetuary (druid), 69
Nature's Ward (druid), 69
Nature's Wrath (paladin). See
under Channel Divinity paladin
options
navigaling. See under travei
necromancer, 118-119
necromancy, 118, 203
school (wizard). See under
areane traditions
Necromancy Savant (wizard), 118
necrotic damage. Seedamage
types
Negative Plane. Seeplanes of
existence
neutral.Seealignment
neutral evil. Seealignmenl
neutral good. Seealignment
Nine Hells, lhe. Seeplanes of
e.istenee
noble.See under background
noble knight. See under
background
nonplayer character (NPC), 8,159,185,189,198
nonlethal damage. Seedamage
N Pc. See nonplayer character
Oalh of Devotion (paladin). See
under sacred oaths
Oath of the Ancients (paladin).
See tmder sacred oaths
Oath ofVengeance (paladin). See
under sacred oaths
oath spells. See under Sacred Oath
objects, 185
attacking, 185
interacting with, 185
using during combat, 190
ane with Shadows (warlock). See
eldrilch invocations
Open Hand Technique (monk), 79
open locks. Seethieves' tools
Opportunist (monk), 80
opportunity attaek, 195
OrC,41
See 0150 language
orison.Seecantrip
Dtherworldly leap (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Otherwordly Patron (warlock), 107
otherworldly patrons, 108-110
Archfey, lhe, 108-109
Fiend, the, 109
Greal Old Dne, the, 109-110
Outer Planes. Seeplanes of
existence
outlander. See under background
Outlands, lhe. Seeplanes of
existence
Overchannel (wizard), 118
owl.Seecreature statistics
Pact Boon (warlock), 107-108
Pael ofthe Blade, 107-108
Pact ofthe Chain, 107
Pael ofthe Tome, 108
Your Pact Boon, 108
Pact Magic (warlock), 107
multiclassing ando See under
multiclassing
pact weapon (warlock), 107-108
paladin, 45, 82-88
quick build, 83
sacred oaths. Seesacred oaths
spel1lis1. 208-209
Pandemonium. Seeplanes of
existence
panther.Seeereature statisties
paralyzed. Seeeonditions
Parry maneuver (fighler). See
maneuvers
party (adventuring), 15
passive check. See under ability
cheek
Path of the Berserker. See under
primai paths
Path ofthe Totem Warrior. See
under primai palhs
Patient Defense (monk). SeeKi
Peerless Skill (bard), 55
penalty,6
percentile (dice). See underdice
Perception (skill). See under
Wisdom
See 0150 travei: noticing threats
Perfect Self (monk), 79
Performance (skill). See under
Charisma
Persistent Rage (barbarian), 49
personality (character), 122-124
Persuasion (skill). See under
Charisma
petrified. Seeconditions
pick locks. Seethieves' tools
pick pockets. SeeDexterity: Sleight
ofHand
piercing damage. Seedamage
types
pirale.See under background
planar travei, 301
plane of Air. Seeplanes of
e.istence
plane of Earth. Seeplanes of
e.istence
Plane of Faerie. Seeplanes of
e.istence
plane of Fire. Seeplanes of
existence
Plane ofShadow. Seeplanes of
existence
Plane ofWater. Seeplanes of
existenee
planes of existence, 5, 300-303
plalinum piece (pp). Seecoinage
player eharacter. Seecharacter
point of origino Seearea of effect
poison damage. Seedamage types
poisoned. Seeconditions
Position of Privilege (noble), 135
Positive Plane. Seeplanes ofexistence
Portent (wizard), 116
Potent Canlrip (wizard), 117
Potent Spellcasting (c1eric,
Knowledge domain), 60
(c1eric, light domain), 61
Precision Attack maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
preparing spel1s. SeeSpellcasting:
c1eric: druid; paladin; wizard
Preserve life (cleric). See under
Channel Divinity cleric options
Primai Champion (barbarian), 49
Primai Patn (barbarian), 48
primai palhs, 49-50
Path ofthe Berserker, 49-50
Path oflhe Totem Warrior, 50
PrimaI Strike (druid), 69
Primeval Awareness (ranger), 92
Primordial. Seelanguage
profession. Seedowntime activity
proficiencies, 11, 12, 14, 155
multiclassing ando See under
multiclassing
saving throw, 14
skHl, 14
spell,14
tool,14
vehicle, 155
weapon,14
proficiency bonus, 14, 173-174,
194
adding, 14, 173
dividing, 14, 173-174
increasing with levei, 15
multidassing ando See under
multiclassing
multiplying, 14, 173-174
Projecled Ward (wizard), 115
projectile weapon. Seeweapon
properties: ammunition
prone, 190-191
See a/50 conditions
Protection. Seetmderfighting styles
pseudodragon. Seecrealure
stalistics
psychic damage. Seedamage types
punching. See under melee attack
Purity of Body (monk), 79
Purity ofSpirit (paladin), 86
Pushing Attack maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
quasit.Seecrealure statistics
quick build, 11
See 0150under specific c1a55
entries
Quickened Spell (soreerer). See
Metamagie
Quivering Paim (monk), 80
race, 11
choosing a, 11, 17
traits. See racial traits
See a/so 5pecific roce entrie5
racial ability score increase. See
racial traits: ability score
increase
racial traits, 11, 17
ability seore increase, 11, 12,
13, 17
age, 17
alignment, 17
languages, 17
size, 17
speed,17
subrace, 17
See a/50 specific roce
entries
Radiance ofthe Oawn (cleric). See
underChannel Divinity cleric
options
radiant damage. Seedamage types
Rage (barbarian), 48
Rally maneuver (fighler). See
maneuvers
range, 195
maximum, 147
normal. 147
of spells. Seecasting a spell:
range
range (weapon property). See
weapon properlies
ranged attack, 195
in melee, 195
ranged weapon, 14, 146, 149, 195
ranger, 45, 89-93
quick build, 90
ranger archetype. Seeranger
archetypes
spelllisl, 209
Ranger Archetype (ranger), 92
ranger archetypes, 93
Beast Mastl':r, 93
Hunter,93
Ranger's Companion (ranger), 93
Rasnemi. Seenuman ethnicitiesral.Seecreature statis ics
raven.Seecreature st.tistics
reach (creature), 1951
reach (weapon pro~e1Y)' See
weapon propertles
reaction, 190 I
R,,~~~::g':,:"(~~,:;r~:,,::::,g
Channel Divlnity c1;ric oplions
Ready adion. See undfr action
Reckless Attack (barb rian), 48
recovering ammunitiqn.
Seeweapon prope ties:
ammunition
recuperating. Seedo
activity
refitling plate armor.
plate armor
Relentless (fighter), 7
Relentless Avenger (p,!.Iadin), 88
Relentless Endurance ~half-orc), 41
Relentless Rage (bar])arian), 49
Reliable Talent (rogue!. 96
religion, 293
See 0150 cleric: dru d; paladin
Religion (skitl). See u~der
Intelligencel
reloading. ~eeweapo properties:
ammunllion
See 0150 objects: u ing during
combat; weapon Rroperties:
loading
Remarkable Athlete ( ghter), 72
Repelling Blast (warl ek). See
eldritch invocatio s
researeh. Seedownti e activity
Researcher (sage), 1 8
resistanee. Seedama e resistance
resting, 186
restrained. Seecondi ions
resull.Seelolal
Retainers (noble vari nt), 136
Retaliation (barbaria ), 50
Ride the Wind (mon . See
Elemental Discipl nes
Riposte maneuver (fi nler). See
maneuvers
Ritual Casting. SeeS ellcasting:
bard; c1eric; druid wizard
See 0150 feals
rituais, 201-202
See 0/50 casting a pell: casting
time
River of Hungry Fia
SeeElemental Oi
rock gnome. Seegn
rogue, 45, 94-98
quick build, 95
roguish archetyp Seeroguish
archetypes
Roguish Archetype ( gue),96
roguish archetypes, 7-98
Arcane Trickster, 7-98
Assassin,97
Thief,97
roleplaying, 8,185-1
roll,6-7
round.See under ti
rounding numbers,
rowed vessel, 155-1
rules,6-7
exceptions, 7
how to play, 6
specific beats ge eral, 7
run.Seeaction: Das action
Rush ohhe Cale Spi its (monk).
SeeElemental Oi ciplines
Rustic Hospitality (~ Ik hero), 131
Saered Oatn (paladi ),85
oatn spells, 85
sacred oaths, 85-88
breaking, 86
Dath of Oevotio 85-86
Oath of the Anci nts, 86-87
Oath ofVengean e,87-88
sacred plants and w d (druid), 66
Sacred Weapon (pai din). See
under Channel O inity paladin
options
sage.Set under bac round
sailor.See under bac ground
Savage Attacks (hal orc),41
save.Seesaving thr w
saving throw, 7, 12, 79,205
death.Seedeath aving throws
ki.Seeki: saving hrows
maneuver. See neuvers:
saving throws
proficiency. See oficiencies:
saving throw
spell.Seespell s ving throws
saving throw modifi r, 12, 179,
205
INDEX3'5
School of Abjuration (wizard). See
underarcane traditions
School of Conjuration (wizard).
See under arcane traditions
School of Divination (wizard). See
underarcane traditions
School of Enchantment (wizard).
See under arcane traditions
School of Evocation (wizard). See
underarcane traditions
School of IIlusion (wizard). See
underarcane traditions
School of Necromancy (wizard).
See under arcane traditions
School ofTransmutation (wizard).
See under areane traditions
sehools of magic. Seeareane
traditions
Sculptor of Flesh (warloek). See
eldritch invoeations
Seulpt Spells (wizard), 117
Second.Story Work (rogue), 97
Second Wind (fighter), 72
Search action. See under action
searching. See under travei
See0/50IntelJigence:
Investigation; Wisdom:
Perceplion
self.Seecasting a spell: range;
targeting
selling treasure. See under wealth
services, 159
sexoSeecharacter: sex and gender
Shadow Arts (monk), 80
Shadowfell, the. Seeplanes ef
existenee
Shadow Step (monk), 80
Shapechanger (wizard), 119
Shape the Flowing River (monk).
SeeElemental Disciplines
Share Spells (ranger), 93
shark, reef. Seecreature statistics
Shelter ofthe Faithful (acolyte),
127
shield.Seearmor and shields
shield dwarf. Seedwarf: mountain
Ship's Passage (sailor), 139
short rest. Seeresting
Sheu.Seehuman ethnidties
shoving, 195
Sigil.Seeplanes of existenee
Signature Spells (wizard), 115
silvered weapon. See under
weapon
silver piece (sp). Seecoinage
simple weapon. Seeweapon
categories
size, 176, 191-192
and weapons. Seeweapon
properties: heavy
lifting and carrying. Seelifting
and carrying: size and
of equipment. Seeequipment:
size
space, 191-192
See 0150racial traits; and
spec!fic roce trail entries
size category, 191
skeleton. Seecreature statistics
skill check. SeI! ability check: skill
Skill Versatility (half.elf), 39
skills with different abilities
(variant). See under abihty check
slashing damage. Seedamage
types
Sleight ofHand (skill). See under
Dexterity
Slippery Mind (rogue), 96Slow fali (monk). 78
Small.Seesize category
snake, constrictor. Seecreature
statistics
snake, poisonous. Seecreature
statistics
Sneak Attack (rogue). 96
social interaction. 8,185-186
soldier.Seeunderbackground
somatic spell component, 203
Song of Rest (bard), 54
sorcerer, 45, 99-104
quick build, 100
sorcerous origino Seesoreerous
origins
spell list, 209
Sorcerous Origino 101
sorcerous origins, 102-104
Draconic Bloodline, 102-103
Wild Magic, 103-104
Sorcerous Restoration, 102
Sorcery Points (sorcerer). SeeFont
ofMagic
Sou IofVengeance (paladin), 88
space.See under size
Speak with Small Beasts (forest
gnome),37
special (weapon property). See
weapon properties
speed.See under movement
See a/50mounts and vehieles;
radal traits; travei
speJl,201
spell attack modifier. See spec!fic
Spellcosling entries
spell attack roll, 205
Seea/sospec!fic Spellcasting
entries
Spell Bombardment (sorcerer), 103
Spellbook (wizard), 114
spellcaster.201
spellcasting, 201-205
Spellcasting (bard), 52-53
(e1eric), 58
(druid),66
(fighter, Eldritch Knight), 75
(paladin),84-85
(ranger),91-92
(rogue, Arcane Trickster),
97-98
(sorcerer),101
(warlock). SeePact Magic
(wizard), 114
See 0150under multiclassing
spellcasling ability, 178, 179,205
See 0150spec!fic Spel/costing
entries
spellcasting focus. See
Spellcasting: bard; e1er!c;
druid; paladin; sorcerer;
warlock; wlzard
spell components. Seeeasting a
spell: components
See 0150material spell
componenl; somatic spell
compenent; verbal spell
component
spell descriptions, 211-289
spell leveI, 201
spell list, 207-211
Spell Mastery (wizard). 115
spell preparation. See
Spellcasting: e1eric; druid;
paladin: wizard
See 0150under multiclassing
SpelJ Resislance (wizard). 116
spell save DC, 205
See a/50 spec!fic Spellcosling
entries
spell saving throws, 205
spells known, 201
See a/50Spellcasting: bard;
fighter, Eldritch Knight; ranger;
rogue, Arcane Trickster;
sorcerer; warlock; ond
multiclassing
spell slots, 201
See a/50 specific Spellcosting
entries; ond multielassing
Spell Thief (rogue), 98
sphere.Seearea of effectspider, giant. Seecreature
statislics
Spirit Seeker (barbarian), 50
Spirit Walker (barbarian), 50
Split Enchantment (wizard), 117
sprite.Seecreature statistics
spy.See under background
squeezing. See under movement
stabili.zing a creature, 197
stable, 197-198
staeking. Seecasting a speJl:
combining effects
See 0150advantage;
disadvantage
standard action. Seeaction
standard language. Seelanguage
Stand Against the Tide (ranger).
SeeSuperior Hunter's Defense
starting wealth. Seeunderweallh
starvation. Seefood and drink:
food requirements
Stealth (skill). See under Dexterity
See a/50armor and shields:
Stealth; hiding; travei
Steel Will (ranger). SeeDefensive
Tactics
Step ofthe Wind (monk). SeeKi
StiIJness of Mind (monk), 79
Stonecunning (dwarf), 20
Stormborn (cleric), 62
Stout Resilience (stout halfling),
28
Strength, 12, 175-176
Athletics, 175
checks, 175
Stroke of luck (rogue), 96
strongheart halfling. Seehalfling:
stout
Student ofWar (fighter), 73
stunned, Seeconditions
Stunning Strike (monk), 79
subrace, 17
Subtle Spell (sorcerer), See
Metamagic
suffocating, 183
sun elf.Seeelf
Sunlight Sensitivity (drow), 24
Superior Criticai (fighter), 73
Superior Darkvision (drow), 24
Superior Hunter's Defense
(ranger),93
Superior Inspiration (bard), 54
superiority dice (fighter), 73
Supreme Healing (cleric), 60
Supreme Sneak (rogue). 97
surprise, 189
Seea/50travei: surprise
Survival (skill). SeeunderWisdom
See0/50traveI: foraging,
navigating, or tracking
Survivor (fighter), 73
svirfneblin. Seegnome
Sweeping AUack maneuver
(fighter). Seemaneuvers
Sweeping Cinder Strike (monk).
SeeElemental Disciplines
Sylvan.Seelanguage
targeting a spetl. Seecasting a
spell: targeting
target number, 7
Armor Class (AC), 7
Difficulty Class (DC). 7
Tempest doma in (cleric). See
underdivine domains
temporary hlt points. See undu
hit points
Tenets of Devotion (paladin), 86
Tenets ofthe Ancients (paladin),
86-87
Tenets ofVengeance (paladin), 88
Terran.Seelanguage
Tethyrian. Seehuman ethnicities
THACO.Seeattack roll
Thief (rogue). See undu roguish
archetypes
Toief of Five Fates (warlock). See
eldrítch invocatíons
Thief's Reflexes (rogue), 97
thieves' cant (rogue), 96
thieves' 10015,154
Third Eye, The (wizard), 116-117
Thirsting Blade (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Thought Shield (warlock), 1lO
Theusand Forms (druid), 69
three.quarters cover, Seecover
thrown (weapon property). See
weapon properties
Thunderbolt Strike (cleric), 62
tnunder damage. Seedamage
types
lides ofChaos (sorcerer), 103tiefling.42-43
tiefling names, 43
tiefling traits, 43
tiers of play, 15
tiger.Seecreature statistics
time, 181
day, 181
minute, 181
round. 181, 189
turn, 189
Timeless 80dy (druid), 67
(monk),79
Tinker (roek gnome), 37
Tiny.Seesize category
Tongue oftne Sun and Moon
(monk),79
tools, 154
total, 7
total cever. Seecover
Totemic Attunement (barbarian),
50
Totem Spirit (barbarian), 50
tracking. See undertravel
trade goods, 144, 157
training.Seedowntime activity
traits.See under personality
Seea/50spec!fic roce troít entries
Trance (elf), 23
Transitive Planes. Seeplanes of
existence
Tranquility (monk), 80
transmutation, 119,203
school (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
Transmutation Savant (wizard),
119
transmuter, 119
Transmuter's Stone (wizard), 119
traps, finding. SeeWisdom:
Perception
See 0150 Intelligence:
Investigation
traps, removing or disabling. See
thieves' tools
travei. 181-183
drawing a map, 183
encounters, 183
foraging, 183
marching order, 182
navigating, 183
noticing threats, 182-183
pace, 181
searching, 183
stealtn, 182
surprise, 183
tracking, 183
Trickery doma in (clericJ. See under
divine domains
trinkets, 160-161
Trip AUack maneuver (fighter). See
maneuvers
truesight, 185
Turami.Seenuman ethnicities
turnoSee under time
turn, taking yeurs, 189-190
See a/50action; bonus action;
movement
Turn the Faithless (paladin). See
underChanoel Divinity paladin
options
Turn the Unholy (paladin). See
underChannel Divinity paladin
options
Turn Undead. See undu Channel
Dívinity e1eric options
Twinned Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
two.handed (weapon property).
Seeweapon properties
two.weapon fighting, 195
Two.Weapon Fighting (class
feature). See undu fighting
styles
unarmed. See under melee attack
Unarmored Defense (barbarian),
48
(monk),78
Unarmored Movement (monk), 78
Uncanny Dodge (ranger). See
Superior Hunter's Defense
(rogue),96
Undead Thralls (wizard), 119
Underdark, 17
Undying Sentinel (paladin), 87
uncommon races, 33
unconscious, 197, 198
See a/50conditions
Undercommon. Seelanguage
underwater combato See undu
combat
unseen attackers and targets,
194-195Upper Planes. Seeplanes ef
existence
urchin.See under background
Use an Objecl action. See under
action
Use Magic Device (rogue), 97
using this book, 6
Vanish (ranger), 92
vehicle.Seemounts and vehicles
verbal spell component, 203
versalile (weapon property). See
weapon properties
Versatile Trickster (rogue), 98
vision, 183
See 0150blíndsight; darkvision;
truesight; Wisdom: Perceplion
Visions of Distant Realms
(warlock). Seeeldritch
invocations
Visions ofthe Past (cleric), 60
Voice ofthe Chain Master
(warJock). Seeeldritch
invocations
Volley (ranger). SeeMultiattack
Vow of Enmity (paladin). See
underChannel Divinity paladin
options
vulnerability. Seedamage
vulnerability
Wanderer (outlander), 136
Warding Fiare (cleric), 61
War domain (cleric), See under
divine domains
War God's Blessing (cleric). See
underChannel Divinity cleric
options
warhorse. Seecreature statistics
See 0150mounts and vehicles
War Magic (fighter), 75
War Priest (deric), 63
WaterWhip (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
warlock, 45, 105-111
quick build, 106
otherworldly patrono See
otherworfdly patrons
spell Iist, 210
Wave of Rolling Earth (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
wealth,143-144
magic item, 144
sellíng treasure, 144
slarting, 143
See a/50expenses
weapon, 14, 146-148, 149
improvised,147-148
silvered,148
table, 149
Weapon Bond (fighter), 75
weapon categories, 146
weapon preficiency, 14, 146
See0/50spec!fic classes:
proficiencies; and spec!fic roce
traít entries
weapon properties, 146-147
Weave, the, 205
Whirlwind Attack (ranger). See
Multiatlack
Whispers ofthe Grave (warlock).
Seeeldritch invocations
Wholeness ofBody (monk), 79-80
wild elf.Seeelf
wild Magic (sorcerer). See under
sorcerous origins
Wild Magic Surge (sorcerer), 103
table, 104
Wild Shape (druid), 66-67
Wisdom, 12, 178
Animal Handling, 178
checks, 178
Insight, 178
Medicine, 178
Perception, 178
Survival, 178
Witch Sight (warlock). Seeeldritch
invocations
wizard, 45, 112-119
arcane tradition. Seearcane
Iraditions
quick build, 113
spell Iist, 210-211
wolf, dire. Seecreature statístics
wolf.Seecreature statistics
wood elf. Seeelf
world, 5-6, 8
See alsoplanes ef existence:
Material Plane
Wrath ofthe Storm (e1eric), 62
XP.Seeexperience points
Ysgard.Seeplanes of existence
zombie.Seecreature statistics
EXPERIEN ALlGNMENT
oINITIATIVE
ATK BONUS DAMAGEfTYPE
EQUIPMENTCURRENTHIT POINTS
TEMPORARYHIT POINTSCLASS-&--L:E"VE-L -------------BACKGROUND
ATIACKS&SPELLCASTINGTotal .
NAMEDUNGEONS &DRAGONS@
OTHER PROFICIENCIES &LANGUAGESQoINSPIRATION )
PROFICIENCY BONUS
Q__ 5trength
__ Dexterity
Constitution
__ lntelligence
Wisdom
CharismaQSAVING THROWS
"o Acrobatics (Dex)
o Animal Handling (Wis)
bJO Arcana (Int)
OAthletics (slr)
O Deception (Cha)
O History (Int)
OInsight (Wis)
O Intimidatian (Cha)QO Investigatian (lnt)
O Medicine (Wis)
O Nature (Int)
O Perception (Wis)
O Performance (Cha)
QO Persuasion (Cha)
OReligion (Int)
Osleight or Hand (De,)
Ostealth (De,)
O Survival (Wis)
SKILLS
(JPASSIVE WISDOM (PERCEPTION)
._--------_. ---_.-._-
HAIR SKIN EVES------._._--.~~_._------- ----------_. --------_... ---------_._-------------
AGE HEIGHT WEIGHT
CHARACTER NAME
NAME
.._------------------------------------------ ----_.------------_._--------------------
CHARACTER APPEARANCE AlUES 8<ORGANIZATIONS
----------------------------_.
--------- -------------------------_ .._----------------------------------
._-------_.__.._---------------- .__._------- ---_.._-------------------------------------
-------_._._---_._---------_ .....------------------- ------------------------
-------------- ______ 0 •• ___ - ••• _----------- ---~_._-_._----- ..._._-----------------...__..-.....---..._------------
._-----------------------------------------_.
--------------_._-------------------------- -.......•._._--_ ..__.._--_._--_ ....-..._-- ..._..._._.._--_.._._--
-..._--------------_._-~---------------_._-_.- ._---------------_._---- -------_.__.-------._--_._._----------
--------_.- ...._._-------------------_._----------
-----------------------~--------- ------_.__..._------------------_._--------------_.
-----------___ o--....._._----------------------------_ ....-----------------_._---_. ._._._-~---------------_ ..-
-------..._.__._----_._------_._----------- ---- ----------
-----------------------._ •.._---------------_.-------------------_._----
._--------_._.__._._-------_. ---------------_._-------- -_._----------------_._-- ---....__.._----~------------
----------- ._-------_._-- --------------------------
---------_._. -------._--------------_._._-------- -~-_._.__..-.-...._------------------------------_ ..__._----
._._-------- .._-~---_._--_._---- ---_._.------------------_._- ------...._----._-_._---_ .._-----------
-- ---..-----------------_._--- ---------
--------------------- ----~----------------~ --------------- ---_.__..._~----------
AOOITIO NAl FEATURES 8<TRAITS
-------------------------------
-------------------------------
---------------------------------
------------------
----------------------------
CHARACTERBACKSTORY TREASURE
]1
I
I)
t
I
..•o
o:)~
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
l)~~
IE~] ]
o
o
o
o
o
I~l(--)(-_)o
SPELLCASTI NG SPELL SAVEDC SPELb ATTACK
A8lLlTY 8pNUS
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _SLOTS EXPENDED
SPEll NAMESPELLCASTING
CLASS
0 _
O
O
O
O
O
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
e)l J
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o..L:. _
IGe.=~í =CANTRIP=S=)I~_~_l__i~
0___________ o
0___________ o
0___________ o
0___________ o
0___________ o
0___________ o
0___________ o
0___________ o
0 _
0 _
0 _
0 _
WHAT COMESNEXT?J
~AVING DELVED INTOTHEDEPTHS OF
character creation, it's time toconsider
your next steps. The fun ofD&Disin
playing the game, notjust making up
characters (though that's fun, too).
TheStarter Setisagreat next step ifyou want totry
your hand at being aDungeon Master and introduce
your friends tolhe game. lfyou don't know anyDMs, try
taking on that role yourself. The Starter Setisthe best
place tobegin yourjourney.
The D&Dbasic rules include some ofthe information
provided inthis book, along with the material necessary
tocreate your own campaign. After absorbing the
Starter Set, check out the D&Dbasic rules, available as
afree download at DungeonsandDragons.com.
TheMonster Manual describes the most important
monsters inthe DUNGEONS&DRAGONSuniverse.
The manual isaimed at DMs, but it's also auseful
reference forplayers.
TheDungeon Master's Cuide isthe ultimate tome
ofDMlore. ltincludes magic items, optiona! rules,
and guidelines forcreating everything from asimpie
dungeon toan entire cosmos foryour campaign.
Each year brings the publication ofnew D&D
adventures. These scenarios and campaigns are the
perfect way totryyour hand atrunning aD&Dgame
with aminimum ofwork.
Looking foraregular D&Dgame or prefer dropping in
when you have time? Check the Store and Event Locator
on our website tosee ifyour local game store isrunning
events such as D&DEncounters or D&DExpeditions.
WHAT COMES NEXTBring your games tolifewith asuite ofenhancements
from arobust set ofplayer and DMdigital tooIsto
accessories Iikeminiatures, vinylmats, campaign maps,
clothing, and more.
Itisn't always possible togather aregular gaming
group. Insuch situations, DUNGEONS&DRAGONS
board games present an ideal casual playexperience.
Vou'lIalso findavariety ofdigital games that offer
aD&Dexperience across Mac, PC, tablets, and
mobile devices.
.rJV~=========::;::~'b
LEVEL UP YOUR 0&0GAME BYVISITING
DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM
TO SEETHE SUITE OF
DUNGEONS &DRAGONSOFFERINGS.
